workshop/content/ldap-groupsync.adoc, before:

## Configuring External Authentication Providers

OpenShift supports a number of different authentication providers, and you can
find the complete list in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.0/authentication/understanding-identity-provider.html[understanding
identity provider configuration]. One of the most commonly used authentication
providers is LDAP, whether provided by Microsoft Active Directory or by other
sources.

OpenShift can perform user authentication against an LDAP server, and can also
configure group membership and certain RBAC attributes based on LDAP group
membership.

### Background: LDAP Structure

In this environment we are providing LDAP with a Red Hat Identity Management
server running on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 running in a VM. IDM is configured
with the following user groups:

* `ose-user`: Users with OpenShift access
** Any users who should be able to log-in to OpenShift must be members of this
group
** All of the below mentioned users are in this group
* `ose-normal-dev`: Normal OpenShift users
** Regular users of OpenShift without special permissions
** Contains: `normaluser1`, `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`
* `ose-fancy-dev`: Fancy OpenShift users
** Users of OpenShift that are granted some special privileges
** Contains: `fancyuser1`, `fancyuser2`
* `ose-teamed-app`: Teamed app users
** A group of users that will have access to the same OpenShift *Project*
** Contains: `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`

#### Examine the OAuth configuration
Since this is a pure, vanilla OpenShift 4 installation, it has the default OAuth resource. You can examine that OAuth configuration with the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get oauth cluster -o yaml
----

You will see something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: OAuth
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-05-03T08:16:00Z
  generation: 1
  name: cluster
  resourceVersion: "8336"
  selfLink: /apis/config.openshift.io/v1/oauths/cluster
  uid: afc6e10d-6d7b-11e9-aa4e-061f775e74c4
spec:
  tokenConfig:
    accessTokenMaxAgeSeconds: 86400
```

There are a few things to note here. Firstly, there's basically nothing here!
How does the `kubeadmin` user work, then? The OpenShift OAuth system knows to
look for a `kubeadmin` *Secret* in the `kube-system` *Namespace*. You can
examine it with the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get secret -n kube-system kubeadmin -o yaml
----

You will see something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: v1
data:
  kubeadmin: JDJhJDEwJDdQNHZtbXMxdmpDa3FsNlJMLjJBcC5BSWdBazB6d09IWUdXZEdrRXBERGRwWXNmVVcxanpX
kind: Secret
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2019-04-29T17:30:51Z"
  name: kubeadmin
  namespace: kube-system
  resourceVersion: "2065"
  selfLink: /api/v1/namespaces/kube-system/secrets/kubeadmin
  uid: 892945dc-6aa4-11e9-9959-02774c6d6b2e
type: Opaque
```

That *Secret* contains the encoded hash of the `kubeadmin` password. This
account will continue to work even after we configure a new `OAuth`. If you
want to disable it, you would need to delete the secret.

In a real-world environment, you will likely want to integrate with your
existing identity management solution. For this lab we are configuring LDAP
as our `identityProvider`. Here's an example of the OAuth configuration. Look
for the element in `identityProviders` with `type: LDAP` like the following:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: OAuth
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  identityProviders:
  - name: idm <1>
    challenge: false
    login: true
    mappingMethod: claim <2>
    type: LDAP
    ldap:
      attributes: <3>
        id:
        - dn
        email:
        - mail
        name:
        - cn
        preferredUsername:
        - uid
      bindDN: "uid=system,cn=sysaccounts,cn=etc,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com" <4>
      bindPassword: <5>
        name: ldap-secret
      ca: <6>
        name: ca-config-map
      insecure: false
      url: "ldap://idm.openshiftworkshop.com/cn=users,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com?uid?sub?(memberOf=cn=ose-user,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com)" <7>
  tokenConfig:
    accessTokenMaxAgeSeconds: 86400
----

Some notable fields under `identityProviders:`:

<1> `name`: The unique ID of the identity provider. It is possible to have
multiple authentication providers in an OpenShift environment, and OpenShift is
able to distinguish between them.

<2> `mappingMethod: claim`: This section has to do with how usernames are
assigned within an OpenShift cluster when multiple providers are configured. See
the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.0/authentication/understanding-identity-provider.html#identity-provider-parameters-understanding-identity-provider[Identity provider parameters] section for more information.

<3> `attributes`: This section defines the LDAP fields to iterate over and
assign to the fields in the OpenShift user's "account". If any attributes are
not found / not populated when searching through the list, the entire
authentication fails. In this case we are creating an identity that is
associated with the LDAP `dn`, an email address from the LDAP `mail`, a name from
the LDAP `cn`, and a username from the LDAP `uid`.

<4> `bindDN`: When searching LDAP, bind to the server as this user.

<5> `bindPassword`: Reference to the Secret that has the password to use when binding for searching.

<6> `ca`: Reference to the ConfigMap that contains the CA certificate to use for
validating the SSL certificate of the LDAP server.

<7> `url`: Identifies the LDAP server and the search to perform.

For more information on the specific details of LDAP authentication in
OpenShift you can refer to the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.1/authentication/identity_providers/configuring-ldap-identity-provider.html[Configuring
an LDAP identity provider^] documentation.

To setup the LDAP identity provider we must:

1. Create a `Secret` with the bind password.
2. Create a `ConfigMap` with the CA certificate.
3. Update the `cluster` `OAuth` object with the LDAP identity provider.

As the `kubeadmin` user apply the OAuth configuration with `oc`.

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc create secret generic ldap-secret --from-literal=bindPassword=bindingpassword -n openshift-config
wget http://idm.openshiftworkshop.com/pub/ca.crt -O {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/ca.crt
oc create configmap ca-config-map --from-file={{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/ca.crt -n openshift-config
oc apply -f {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/oauth-cluster.yaml
----

[NOTE]
====
We use `apply` because there is an existing `OAuth` object. If you used
`create` you would get an outright error that the object already exists. You
still get a warning, but that's OK.
====

In the above commands, we're downloading the ca.crt file because the IDM server intends to be the CA for all corporate certificates.

#### Syncing LDAP Groups to OpenShift Groups
In OpenShift, groups can be used to manage users and control permissions for
multiple users at once. There is a section in the documentation on how to
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/install_config/syncing_groups_with_ldap.html[sync
groups with LDAP^]. Syncing groups involves running a program called `groupsync`
when logged into OpenShift as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges, and using
a configuration file that tells OpenShift what to do with the users it finds in
the various groups.

We have provided a `groupsync` configuration file for you:

View configuration file
[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
cat {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/groupsync.yaml
----

Without going into too much detail (you can look at the documentation), the
`groupsync` config file does the following:

* searches LDAP using the specified bind user and password
* queries for any LDAP groups whose name begins with `ose-`
* creates OpenShift groups with a name from the `cn` of the LDAP group
* finds the members of the LDAP group and then puts them into the created
  OpenShift group
* uses the `dn` and `uid` as the UID and name attributes, respectively, in
  OpenShift

Execute the `groupsync`:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm groups sync --sync-config={{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/groupsync.yaml --confirm
----

You will see output like the following:

----
group/ose-user
group/ose-normal-dev
group/ose-fancy-dev
group/ose-teamed-app
----

What you are seeing is the *Group* objects that have been created by the
`groupsync` command. If you are curious about the `--confirm` flag, check the
output of the help with `oc adm groups sync -h`.

If you want to see the *Groups* that were created, execute the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get groups
----

You will see output like the following:

----
NAME             USERS
ose-fancy-dev    fancyuser1, fancyuser2
ose-normal-dev   normaluser1, teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-teamed-app   teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-user         normaluser1, fancyuser1, fancyuser2, teamuser1, teamuser2
----

Take a look at a specific group in YAML:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get group ose-fancy-dev -o yaml
----

The YAML looks like:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: user.openshift.io/v1
kind: Group
metadata:
  annotations:
    openshift.io/ldap.sync-time: 2019-04-18T13:54:35Z
    openshift.io/ldap.uid: cn=ose-fancy-dev,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com
    openshift.io/ldap.url: idm.openshiftworkshop.com:389
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-18T13:46:15Z
  labels:
    openshift.io/ldap.host: idm.openshiftworkshop.com
  name: ose-fancy-dev
  resourceVersion: "2239168"
  selfLink: /apis/user.openshift.io/v1/groups/ose-fancy-dev
  uid: 55c57ee9-61e0-11e9-b61c-0a580a82002f
users:
- fancyuser1
- fancyuser2
----

OpenShift has automatically associated some LDAP metadata with the *Group*, and
has listed the users who are in the group.

What happens if you list the *Users*?

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get user
----

You will get:

----
No resources found.
----

Why would there be no *Users* found? They are clearly listed in the *Group*
definition.

*Users* are not actually created until the first time they try to log in. What
you are seeing in the *Group* definition is simply a placeholder telling
OpenShift that, if it encounters a *User* with that specific ID, that it should
be associated with the *Group*.

#### Change Group Policy
In your environment, there is a special group of super developers called
_ose-fancy-dev_ who should have special `cluster-reader` privileges. This is a role
that allows a user to view administrative-level information about the cluster.
For example, they can see the list of all *Projects* in the cluster.

Change the policy for the `ose-fancy-dev` *Group*:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-cluster-role-to-group cluster-reader ose-fancy-dev
----

[NOTE]
====
If you are interested in the different roles that come with OpenShift, you can
learn more about them in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.1/authentication/using-rbac.html[role-based access control (RBAC)^] documentation.
====

#### Examine `cluster-reader` policy
Go ahead and login as a regular user:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
----

Then, try to list *Projects*:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get projects
----

You will see:

----
No resources found.
----

Now, login as a member of `ose-fancy-dev`:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u fancyuser1 -p openshift
----

And then perform the same `oc get projects` and you will now see the list of all
of the projects in the cluster:

----
NAME                                                    DISPLAY NAME                        STATUS
    app-management
  * default
    kube-public
    kube-system
    labguide
    openshift
    openshift-apiserver
...
----

You should now be starting to understand how RBAC in OpenShift Container
Platform can work.

#### Create Projects for Collaboration
Make sure you login as the cluster administrator:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u system:serviceaccount:lab-ocp-cns:dashboard-user
----

Then, create several *Projects* for people to collaborate:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm new-project app-dev --display-name="Application Development"
oc adm new-project app-test --display-name="Application Testing"
oc adm new-project app-prod --display-name="Application Production"
----

You have now created several *Projects* that represent a typical Software
Development Lifecycle setup. Next, you will configure *Groups* to grant
collaborative access to these projects.

[NOTE]
====
Creating projects with `oc adm new-project` does *not* use the project request
process or the project request template. These projects will not have quotas or
limitranges applied by default. A cluster administrator can "impersonate" other
users, so there are several options if you wanted these projects to get
quotas/limit ranges:

. use `--as` to specify impersonating a regular user with `oc new-project`
. use `oc process` and provide values for the project request template, piping
  into create (eg: `oc process ... | oc create -f -`). This will create all of
  the objects in the project request template, which would include the quota and
  limit range.
. manually create/define the quota and limit ranges after creating the projects.

For these exercises it is not important to have quotas or limit ranges on these
projects.
====

#### Map Groups to Projects
As you saw earlier, there are several roles within OpenShift that are
preconfigured. When it comes to *Projects*, you similarly can grant view, edit,
or administrative access. Let's give our `ose-teamed-app` users access to edit the
development and testing projects:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-dev
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-test
----

And then give them access to view production:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group view ose-teamed-app -n app-prod
----

Now, give the `ose-fancy-dev` group edit access to the production project:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-fancy-dev -n app-prod
----

#### Examine Group Access
Log in as `normaluser1` and see what *Projects* you can see:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

You should get:

----
No resources found.
----

Then, try `teamuser1` from the `ose-teamed-app` group:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u teamuser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

You should get:

----
NAME       DISPLAY NAME              STATUS
app-dev    Application Development   Active
app-prod   Application Production    Active
app-test   Application Testing       Active
----

You did not grant the team users edit access to the production project. Go ahead
and try to create something in the production project as `teamuser1`:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc project app-prod
oc new-app docker.io/siamaksade/mapit
----

You will see that it will not work:

----
error: can't lookup images: imagestreamimports.image.openshift.io is forbidden: User "teamuser1" cannot create resource "imagestreamimports" in API group "image.openshift.io" in the namespace "app-prod"
error:  local file access failed with: stat docker.io/siamaksade/mapit: no such file or directory
error: unable to locate any images in image streams, templates loaded in accessible projects, template files, local docker images with name "docker.io/siamaksade/mapit"

Argument 'docker.io/siamaksade/mapit' was classified as an image, image~source, or loaded template reference.

The 'oc new-app' command will match arguments to the following types:

  1. Images tagged into image streams in the current project or the 'openshift' project
     - if you don't specify a tag, we'll add ':latest'
  2. Images in the Docker Hub, on remote registries, or on the local Docker engine
  3. Templates in the current project or the 'openshift' project
  4. Git repository URLs or local paths that point to Git repositories

--allow-missing-images can be used to point to an image that does not exist yet.

See 'oc new-app -h' for examples.
----

This failure is exactly what we wanted to see.

#### Prometheus
Now that you have a user with `cluster-reader` privileges (one that can see
many administrative aspects of the cluster), we can revisit Prometheus and
attempt to log-in to it.

Login as a the user with `cluster-reader` privileges:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u fancyuser1 -p openshift
----

Find the `prometheus` `Route` with the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get route prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring
----

You will see something like the following:

----
NAME             HOST/PORT                                                                      PATH   SERVICES         PORT   TERMINATION          WILDCARD
prometheus-k8s   prometheus-k8s-openshift-monitoring.{{ ROUTE_SUBDOMAIN }}          prometheus-k8s   web    reencrypt/Redirect   None
----

[WARNING]
====
Before continuing, make sure to go to the OpenShift web console and log out
by using the dropdown menu at the upper right where it says `kube:admin`.
Otherwise Prometheus will try to use your `kubeadmin` user to pass through
authentication. While it will work, it doesn't demonstrate the
`cluster-reader` role.
====

The installer configured a `Route` for Prometheus by default. Go ahead and
control+click the link:https://prometheus-k8s-openshift-monitoring.{{
ROUTE_SUBDOMAIN }}[Prometheus link] to open it in your browser. You'll be
greeted with a login screen. Click the *Log in with OpenShift* button, then
select the `idm` auth mechanism, and use the `fancyuser1` user that you gave
`cluster-reader` privileges to earlier. More specifically, the
`ose-fancy-dev` group has `cluster-reader` permissions, and `fancyuser1` is a
member. Remember that the password for all of these users is `openshift`. You
will probably get a certificate error because of the self-signed certificate.
Make sure to accept it.

After logging in, the first time you will be presented with an auth proxy
permissions acknowledgement:

.Auth Proxy Acceptance.
image::prometheus-auth-proxy.png[]

There is actually an OAuth proxy that sits in the flow between you and the
Prometheus container. This proxy is used to validate your AuthenticatioN
(AuthN) as well as authorize (AuthZ) what is allowed to happen. Here you are
explicitly authorizing the permissions from your `fancyuser1` account to be
used as part of accessing Prometheus. Hit _Allow selected permissions_.

At this point you are viewing Prometheus. There are no alerts configured. If
you look at `Status` and then `Targets` you can see some interesting
information about the current state of the cluster.

Commit message:

fixes image and adds login

workshop/content/ldap-groupsync.adoc, after:

## Configuring External Authentication Providers

OpenShift supports a number of different authentication providers, and you can
find the complete list in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.0/authentication/understanding-identity-provider.html[understanding
identity provider configuration]. One of the most commonly used authentication
providers is LDAP, whether provided by Microsoft Active Directory or by other
sources.

OpenShift can perform user authentication against an LDAP server, and can also
configure group membership and certain RBAC attributes based on LDAP group
membership.

### Background: LDAP Structure

In this environment we are providing LDAP with a Red Hat Identity Management
server running on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 running in a VM. IDM is configured
with the following user groups:

* `ose-user`: Users with OpenShift access
** Any users who should be able to log-in to OpenShift must be members of this
group
** All of the below mentioned users are in this group
* `ose-normal-dev`: Normal OpenShift users
** Regular users of OpenShift without special permissions
** Contains: `normaluser1`, `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`
* `ose-fancy-dev`: Fancy OpenShift users
** Users of OpenShift that are granted some special privileges
** Contains: `fancyuser1`, `fancyuser2`
* `ose-teamed-app`: Teamed app users
** A group of users that will have access to the same OpenShift *Project*
** Contains: `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`

#### Examine the OAuth configuration
Since this is a pure, vanilla OpenShift 4 installation, it has the default OAuth resource. You can examine that OAuth configuration with the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get oauth cluster -o yaml
----

You will see something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: OAuth
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-05-03T08:16:00Z
  generation: 1
  name: cluster
  resourceVersion: "8336"
  selfLink: /apis/config.openshift.io/v1/oauths/cluster
  uid: afc6e10d-6d7b-11e9-aa4e-061f775e74c4
spec:
  tokenConfig:
    accessTokenMaxAgeSeconds: 86400
```

There are a few things to note here. Firstly, there's basically nothing here!
How does the `kubeadmin` user work, then? The OpenShift OAuth system knows to
look for a `kubeadmin` *Secret* in the `kube-system` *Namespace*. You can
examine it with the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get secret -n kube-system kubeadmin -o yaml
----

You will see something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: v1
data:
  kubeadmin: JDJhJDEwJDdQNHZtbXMxdmpDa3FsNlJMLjJBcC5BSWdBazB6d09IWUdXZEdrRXBERGRwWXNmVVcxanpX
kind: Secret
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2019-04-29T17:30:51Z"
  name: kubeadmin
  namespace: kube-system
  resourceVersion: "2065"
  selfLink: /api/v1/namespaces/kube-system/secrets/kubeadmin
  uid: 892945dc-6aa4-11e9-9959-02774c6d6b2e
type: Opaque
```

That *Secret* contains the encoded hash of the `kubeadmin` password. This
account will continue to work even after we configure a new `OAuth`. If you
want to disable it, you would need to delete the secret.

In a real-world environment, you will likely want to integrate with your
existing identity management solution. For this lab we are configuring LDAP
as our `identityProvider`. Here's an example of the OAuth configuration. Look
for the element in `identityProviders` with `type: LDAP` like the following:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: OAuth
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  identityProviders:
  - name: idm <1>
    challenge: false
    login: true
    mappingMethod: claim <2>
    type: LDAP
    ldap:
      attributes: <3>
        id:
        - dn
        email:
        - mail
        name:
        - cn
        preferredUsername:
        - uid
      bindDN: "uid=system,cn=sysaccounts,cn=etc,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com" <4>
      bindPassword: <5>
        name: ldap-secret
      ca: <6>
        name: ca-config-map
      insecure: false
      url: "ldap://idm.openshiftworkshop.com/cn=users,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com?uid?sub?(memberOf=cn=ose-user,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com)" <7>
  tokenConfig:
    accessTokenMaxAgeSeconds: 86400
----

Some notable fields under `identityProviders:`:

<1> `name`: The unique ID of the identity provider. It is possible to have
multiple authentication providers in an OpenShift environment, and OpenShift is
able to distinguish between them.

<2> `mappingMethod: claim`: This section has to do with how usernames are
assigned within an OpenShift cluster when multiple providers are configured. See
the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.0/authentication/understanding-identity-provider.html#identity-provider-parameters-understanding-identity-provider[Identity provider parameters] section for more information.

<3> `attributes`: This section defines the LDAP fields to iterate over and
assign to the fields in the OpenShift user's "account". If any attributes are
not found / not populated when searching through the list, the entire
authentication fails. In this case we are creating an identity that is
associated with the LDAP `dn`, an email address from the LDAP `mail`, a name from
the LDAP `cn`, and a username from the LDAP `uid`.

<4> `bindDN`: When searching LDAP, bind to the server as this user.

<5> `bindPassword`: Reference to the Secret that has the password to use when binding for searching.

<6> `ca`: Reference to the ConfigMap that contains the CA certificate to use for
validating the SSL certificate of the LDAP server.

<7> `url`: Identifies the LDAP server and the search to perform.

For more information on the specific details of LDAP authentication in
OpenShift you can refer to the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.1/authentication/identity_providers/configuring-ldap-identity-provider.html[Configuring
an LDAP identity provider^] documentation.

To setup the LDAP identity provider we must:

1. Create a `Secret` with the bind password.
2. Create a `ConfigMap` with the CA certificate.
3. Update the `cluster` `OAuth` object with the LDAP identity provider.

As the `kubeadmin` user apply the OAuth configuration with `oc`.

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc create secret generic ldap-secret --from-literal=bindPassword=bindingpassword -n openshift-config
wget http://idm.openshiftworkshop.com/pub/ca.crt -O {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/ca.crt
oc create configmap ca-config-map --from-file={{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/ca.crt -n openshift-config
oc apply -f {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/oauth-cluster.yaml
----

[NOTE]
====
We use `apply` because there is an existing `OAuth` object. If you used
`create` you would get an outright error that the object already exists. You
still get a warning, but that's OK.
====

In the above commands, we're downloading the ca.crt file because the IDM server intends to be the CA for all corporate certificates.

#### Syncing LDAP Groups to OpenShift Groups
In OpenShift, groups can be used to manage users and control permissions for
multiple users at once. There is a section in the documentation on how to
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/install_config/syncing_groups_with_ldap.html[sync
groups with LDAP^]. Syncing groups involves running a program called `groupsync`
when logged into OpenShift as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges, and using
a configuration file that tells OpenShift what to do with the users it finds in
the various groups.

We have provided a `groupsync` configuration file for you:

View configuration file
[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
cat {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/groupsync.yaml
----

Without going into too much detail (you can look at the documentation), the
`groupsync` config file does the following:

* searches LDAP using the specified bind user and password
* queries for any LDAP groups whose name begins with `ose-`
* creates OpenShift groups with a name from the `cn` of the LDAP group
* finds the members of the LDAP group and then puts them into the created
  OpenShift group
* uses the `dn` and `uid` as the UID and name attributes, respectively, in
  OpenShift

Execute the `groupsync`:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm groups sync --sync-config={{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/groupsync.yaml --confirm
----

You will see output like the following:

----
group/ose-user
group/ose-normal-dev
group/ose-fancy-dev
group/ose-teamed-app
----

What you are seeing is the *Group* objects that have been created by the
`groupsync` command. If you are curious about the `--confirm` flag, check the
output of the help with `oc adm groups sync -h`.

If you want to see the *Groups* that were created, execute the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get groups
----

You will see output like the following:

----
NAME             USERS
ose-fancy-dev    fancyuser1, fancyuser2
ose-normal-dev   normaluser1, teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-teamed-app   teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-user         normaluser1, fancyuser1, fancyuser2, teamuser1, teamuser2
----

Take a look at a specific group in YAML:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get group ose-fancy-dev -o yaml
----

The YAML looks like:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: user.openshift.io/v1
kind: Group
metadata:
  annotations:
    openshift.io/ldap.sync-time: 2019-04-18T13:54:35Z
    openshift.io/ldap.uid: cn=ose-fancy-dev,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=openshiftworkshop,dc=com
    openshift.io/ldap.url: idm.openshiftworkshop.com:389
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-18T13:46:15Z
  labels:
    openshift.io/ldap.host: idm.openshiftworkshop.com
  name: ose-fancy-dev
  resourceVersion: "2239168"
  selfLink: /apis/user.openshift.io/v1/groups/ose-fancy-dev
  uid: 55c57ee9-61e0-11e9-b61c-0a580a82002f
users:
- fancyuser1
- fancyuser2
----

OpenShift has automatically associated some LDAP metadata with the *Group*, and
has listed the users who are in the group.

What happens if you list the *Users*?

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get user
----

You will get:

----
No resources found.
----

Why would there be no *Users* found? They are clearly listed in the *Group*
definition.

*Users* are not actually created until the first time they try to log in. What
you are seeing in the *Group* definition is simply a placeholder telling
OpenShift that, if it encounters a *User* with that specific ID, that it should
be associated with the *Group*.

#### Change Group Policy
In your environment, there is a special group of super developers called
_ose-fancy-dev_ who should have special `cluster-reader` privileges. This is a role
that allows a user to view administrative-level information about the cluster.
For example, they can see the list of all *Projects* in the cluster.

Change the policy for the `ose-fancy-dev` *Group*:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-cluster-role-to-group cluster-reader ose-fancy-dev
----

[NOTE]
====
If you are interested in the different roles that come with OpenShift, you can
learn more about them in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.1/authentication/using-rbac.html[role-based access control (RBAC)^] documentation.
====

#### Examine `cluster-reader` policy
Go ahead and login as a regular user:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
----

Then, try to list *Projects*:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get projects
----

You will see:

----
No resources found.
----

Now, login as a member of `ose-fancy-dev`:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u fancyuser1 -p openshift
----

And then perform the same `oc get projects` and you will now see the list of all
of the projects in the cluster:

----
NAME                                                    DISPLAY NAME                        STATUS
    app-management
  * default
    kube-public
    kube-system
    labguide
    openshift
    openshift-apiserver
...
----

You should now be starting to understand how RBAC in OpenShift Container
Platform can work.

#### Create Projects for Collaboration
Make sure you login as the cluster administrator:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u system:serviceaccount:lab-ocp-cns:dashboard-user
----

Then, create several *Projects* for people to collaborate:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm new-project app-dev --display-name="Application Development"
oc adm new-project app-test --display-name="Application Testing"
oc adm new-project app-prod --display-name="Application Production"
----

You have now created several *Projects* that represent a typical Software
Development Lifecycle setup. Next, you will configure *Groups* to grant
collaborative access to these projects.

[NOTE]
====
Creating projects with `oc adm new-project` does *not* use the project request
process or the project request template. These projects will not have quotas or
limitranges applied by default. A cluster administrator can "impersonate" other
users, so there are several options if you wanted these projects to get
quotas/limit ranges:

. use `--as` to specify impersonating a regular user with `oc new-project`
. use `oc process` and provide values for the project request template, piping
  into create (eg: `oc process ... | oc create -f -`). This will create all of
  the objects in the project request template, which would include the quota and
  limit range.
. manually create/define the quota and limit ranges after creating the projects.

For these exercises it is not important to have quotas or limit ranges on these
projects.
====

#### Map Groups to Projects
As you saw earlier, there are several roles within OpenShift that are
preconfigured. When it comes to *Projects*, you similarly can grant view, edit,
or administrative access. Let's give our `ose-teamed-app` users access to edit the
development and testing projects:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-dev
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-test
----

And then give them access to view production:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group view ose-teamed-app -n app-prod
----

Now, give the `ose-fancy-dev` group edit access to the production project:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-fancy-dev -n app-prod
----

#### Examine Group Access
Log in as `normaluser1` and see what *Projects* you can see:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

You should get:

----
No resources found.
----

Then, try `teamuser1` from the `ose-teamed-app` group:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u teamuser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

You should get:

----
NAME       DISPLAY NAME              STATUS
app-dev    Application Development   Active
app-prod   Application Production    Active
app-test   Application Testing       Active
----

You did not grant the team users edit access to the production project. Go ahead
and try to create something in the production project as `teamuser1`:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc project app-prod
oc new-app docker.io/siamaksade/mapit
----

You will see that it will not work:

----
error: can't lookup images: imagestreamimports.image.openshift.io is forbidden: User "teamuser1" cannot create resource "imagestreamimports" in API group "image.openshift.io" in the namespace "app-prod"
error:  local file access failed with: stat docker.io/siamaksade/mapit: no such file or directory
error: unable to locate any images in image streams, templates loaded in accessible projects, template files, local docker images with name "docker.io/siamaksade/mapit"

Argument 'docker.io/siamaksade/mapit' was classified as an image, image~source, or loaded template reference.

The 'oc new-app' command will match arguments to the following types:

  1. Images tagged into image streams in the current project or the 'openshift' project
     - if you don't specify a tag, we'll add ':latest'
  2. Images in the Docker Hub, on remote registries, or on the local Docker engine
  3. Templates in the current project or the 'openshift' project
  4. Git repository URLs or local paths that point to Git repositories

--allow-missing-images can be used to point to an image that does not exist yet.

See 'oc new-app -h' for examples.
----

This failure is exactly what we wanted to see.

#### Prometheus
Now that you have a user with `cluster-reader` privileges (one that can see
many administrative aspects of the cluster), we can revisit Prometheus and
attempt to log-in to it.

Login as a the user with `cluster-reader` privileges:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u fancyuser1 -p openshift
----

Find the `prometheus` `Route` with the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get route prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring
----

You will see something like the following:

----
NAME             HOST/PORT                                                                      PATH   SERVICES         PORT   TERMINATION          WILDCARD
prometheus-k8s   prometheus-k8s-openshift-monitoring.{{ ROUTE_SUBDOMAIN }}          prometheus-k8s   web    reencrypt/Redirect   None
----

[WARNING]
====
Before continuing, make sure to go to the OpenShift web console and log out
by using the dropdown menu at the upper right where it says `kube:admin`.
Otherwise Prometheus will try to use your `kubeadmin` user to pass through
authentication. While it will work, it doesn't demonstrate the
`cluster-reader` role.
====

The installer configured a `Route` for Prometheus by default. Go ahead and
control+click the link:https://prometheus-k8s-openshift-monitoring.{{
ROUTE_SUBDOMAIN }}[Prometheus link] to open it in your browser. You'll be
greeted with a login screen. Click the *Log in with OpenShift* button, then
select the `idm` auth mechanism, and use the `fancyuser1` user that you gave
`cluster-reader` privileges to earlier. More specifically, the
`ose-fancy-dev` group has `cluster-reader` permissions, and `fancyuser1` is a
member. Remember that the password for all of these users is `openshift`. You
will probably get a certificate error because of the self-signed certificate.
Make sure to accept it.

After logging in, the first time you will be presented with an auth proxy
permissions acknowledgement:

.Auth Proxy Acceptance.
image::images/prometheus-auth-proxy.png[]

There is actually an OAuth proxy that sits in the flow between you and the
Prometheus container. This proxy is used to validate your AuthenticatioN
(AuthN) as well as authorize (AuthZ) what is allowed to happen. Here you are
explicitly authorizing the permissions from your `fancyuser1` account to be
used as part of accessing Prometheus. Hit _Allow selected permissions_.

At this point you are viewing Prometheus. There are no alerts configured. If
you look at `Status` and then `Targets` you can see some interesting
information about the current state of the cluster.

After you are done, make sure to login again as the admin user:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc login -u system:serviceaccount:lab-ocp-cns:dashboard-user
----
