labguide/environment.adoc, before:

OpenShift Container## Environment Overview

You will be interacting with an OpenShift 3.10 cluster that is running on {{
ENVIRONMENT }}. During the lab you will also install OpenShift Container Storage
3.10. The complete environment consists of the following systems:

* 1 master node
* 1 infrastructure node
* 6 "application" nodes
** 3 will run workload and the initial Container Native Storage instances
** 3 will be added to the cluster later
* 1 server running Red Hat Identity Management (IdM, for LDAP authentication)

.Lab Environment Overview
[options="header"]
|==============================================
| Role     | Internal FQDN
| Master Node       | {{MASTER_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Infrastructure Node        | {{INFRA_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #1        | {{NODE1_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #2        | {{NODE2_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #3        | {{NODE3_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #4        | {{NODE4_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #5        | {{NODE5_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #6        | {{NODE6_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| IdM Server     |    {{IDM_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
|==============================================

All addresses are internal to the lab environment. The only system you
publicly access via SSH and the browser is the OpenShift Master node:

.Public Lab Access
[options="header"]
|==============================================
| Role     | Public FQDN
| Master Node       | {{MASTER_EXTERNAL_FQDN}}
|==============================================

You will be installing OpenShift Container Platform v3.10 using the advanced
installation method, which involves executing various Ansible playbooks. You
will also install Container Native Storage v3.10.

Note that references to product documentation will be specifically pointing
to the 3.10 versions, but newer software and documentation versions may be
available.

## How to get support

In case of technical or functional problems please reach out to mailto:openshift-ops-testdrive@redhat.com[openshift-ops-testdrive@redhat.com]. This is a ticket based system where you will be able to reach the authors and supporters of this Test Drive Experience.

## Conventions
You will see various code and command blocks throughout these exercises. Some of
the command blocks can be copy/pasted directly. Others will require modification
of the command before execution. If you see a command block with a red border
(see below), the command will require slight modification.

[source,none,role=copypaste]
----
some command to modify
----

### Logging in
Most of the exercises in this lab will be facilitated using the OpenShift command line client on the master node. For convenient access to the master's command line we provide a web-based SSH console: {{ SSH_CONSOLE_URL }}

Use the user name `cloud-user` and the password `{{ KEYNAME }}` when prompted.

.SSH Console Login
image::webssh_login.png[]

If you prefer to use an SSH client on your system you can do that too, using the same credentials:

[source,bash]
----
ssh -l cloud-user {{MASTER_EXTERNAL_FQDN}}
----

Once you are logged in you end up on the OpenShift Master Node:

----
[cloud-user@master ~]$
----

The `cloud-user` account has password-less sudo privileges and SSH login on
all systems using internal addressing from the table above.

Commit message:

fix of workshopper issue (#352)
* Updates for latest workshopper

* resolves #346

* registry version

* various 310 changes - staging for rebase against cooktheryan work

* Formatting, tweaks, and other changes for 310

* removal of OCSOpenShift Container:experimental:

* new name

* Fixes issues with use of osm_ items

* revert workshopper update

* new ami

labguide/environment.adoc, after:

OpenShift Container## Environment Overview

You will be interacting with an OpenShift 3.10 cluster that is running on {{
ENVIRONMENT }}. During the lab you will also install OpenShift Container Storage
3.10. The complete environment consists of the following systems:

* 1 master node
* 1 infrastructure node
* 6 "application" nodes
** 3 will run workload and the initial Container Native Storage instances
** 3 will be added to the cluster later
* 1 server running Red Hat Identity Management (IdM, for LDAP authentication)

.Lab Environment Overview
[options="header"]
|==============================================
| Role     | Internal FQDN
| Master Node       | {{MASTER_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Infrastructure Node        | {{INFRA_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #1        | {{NODE1_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #2        | {{NODE2_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #3        | {{NODE3_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #4        | {{NODE4_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #5        | {{NODE5_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| Application Node #6        | {{NODE6_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
| IdM Server     |    {{IDM_INTERNAL_FQDN}}
|==============================================

All addresses are internal to the lab environment. The only system you
publicly access via SSH and the browser is the OpenShift Master node:

.Public Lab Access
[options="header"]
|==============================================
| Role     | Public FQDN
| Master Node       | {{MASTER_EXTERNAL_FQDN}}
|==============================================

You will be installing OpenShift Container Platform v3.10 using the advanced
installation method, which involves executing various Ansible playbooks. You
will also install Container Native Storage v3.10.

Note that references to product documentation will be specifically pointing
to the 3.10 versions, but newer software and documentation versions may be
available.

## How to get support

In case of technical or functional problems please reach out to mailto:openshift-ops-testdrive@redhat.com[openshift-ops-testdrive@redhat.com]. This is a ticket based system where you will be able to reach the authors and supporters of this Test Drive Experience.

## Conventions
You will see various code and command blocks throughout these exercises. Some of
the command blocks can be copy/pasted directly. Others will require modification
of the command before execution. If you see a command block with a red border
(see below), the command will require slight modification.

[source,none,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
some command to modify
----

Most command blocks support auto highlighting with a click. If you hover over the command block above and click, it should automatically highlight all the text to make for easier copying.

### Logging in
Most of the exercises in this lab will be facilitated using the OpenShift command line client on the master node. For convenient access to the master's command line we provide a web-based SSH console: {{ SSH_CONSOLE_URL }}

Use the user name `cloud-user` and the password `{{ KEYNAME }}` when prompted.

.SSH Console Login
image::webssh_login.png[]

If you prefer to use an SSH client on your system you can do that too, using the same credentials:

[source,bash,role="copypaste"]
----
ssh -l cloud-user {{MASTER_EXTERNAL_FQDN}}
----

Once you are logged in you end up on the OpenShift Master Node:

----
[cloud-user@master ~]$
----

The `cloud-user` account has password-less sudo privileges and SSH login on
all systems using internal addressing from the table above.
