labguide/infra-nodes.adoc, before:

## OpenShift Infrastructure Nodes
The OpenShift subscription model allows customers to run various core
infrastructure components at no additional charge. In other words, a node
that is only running core OpenShift infrastructure components is not counted
in terms of the total number of subscriptions required to cover the
environment.

OpenShift components that fall into the infrastructure categorization
include:

* kubernetes and OpenShift control plane services ("masters")
* router
* container image registry
* cluster metrics collection ("monitoring")
* cluster aggregated logging
* service brokers

Any node running a container/pod/component not described above is considered
a worker and must be covered by a subscription.

### More MachineSet Details
In the `MachineSets` exercises you explored using `MachineSets` and scaling
the cluster by changing their replica count. In the case of an infrastructure
node, we want to create additional `Machines` that have specific Kubernetes
labels. Then, we can configure the various infrastructure components to run
specifically on nodes with those labels.

[NOTE]
====
Currently the operators that are used to control infrastructure components do
not all support the use of taints and tolerations. This means that
infrastructure workload will go onto the infrastructure nodes, but other
workload is not specifically prevented from running on the infrastructure
nodes. In other words, user workload may commingle with infrastructure
workload until full taint/toleration support is implemented in all operators.

The use of taints/tolerations is not covered in any of these exercises.
====

To accomplish this, you will create additional `MachineSets`.

In order to understand how `MachineSets` work, run the following.

This will allow you to follow along with some of the following discussion.

[source,bash,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
oc get machineset -n openshift-machine-api -o yaml cluster-5fa6-hx2ml-worker-us-east-2c
----

#### Metadata
The `metadata` on the `MachineSet` itself includes information like the name
of the `MachineSet` and various labels. 

```YAML
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-01-25T16:00:34Z
  generation: 1
  labels:
    sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: 190125-3
    sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-role: worker
    sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-type: worker
  name: 190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
  namespace: openshift-machine-api
  resourceVersion: "9027"
  selfLink: /apis/cluster.k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/openshift-machine-api/machinesets/190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
  uid: 591b4d06-20ba-11e9-a880-068acb199400
```

[NOTE]
====
You might see some `annotations` on your `MachineSet` if you dumped
one that had a `MachineAutoScaler` defined.
====

#### Selector
The `MachineSet` defines how to create `Machines`, and the `Selector` tells
the operator which machines are associated with the set:

```YAML
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: 190125-3
      sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machineset: 190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
```

In this case, the cluster name is `190125-3` and there is an additional
label for the whole set.

### Template Metadata
The `template` is the part of the `MachineSet` that templates out the
`Machine`. The `template` itself can have metadata associated, and we need to
make sure that things match here when we make changes:

```YAML
  template:
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: null
      labels:
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: 190125-3
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-role: worker
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-type: worker
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machineset: 190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
```

#### Template Spec
The `template` needs to specify how the `Machine`/`Node` should be created.
You will notice that the `spec` and, more specifically, the `providerSpec`
contains all of the important AWS data to help get the `Machine` created
correctly and bootstrapped.

In our case, we want to ensure that the resulting node inherits one or more
specific labels. As you've seen in the examples above, labels go in
`metadata` sections:

```YAML
  spec:
      metadata:
        creationTimestamp: null
      providerSpec:
        value:
          ami:
            id: ami-08871aee06d13e584
...
```

By default the `MachineSets` that the installer creates do not apply any
additional labels to the node.

### Defining a Custom MachineSet
Now that you've analyzed an existing `MachineSet` it's time to go over the
rules for creating one, at least for a simple change like we're making:

1. Don't change anything in the `providerSpec`
2. Don't change any instances of `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: <clusterid>`
3. Give your `MachineSet` a unique `name`
4. Make sure any instances of `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machineset` match the `name`
5. Add labels you want on the nodes to `.spec.template.spec.metadata.labels`
6. Even though you're changing `MachineSet` `name` references, be sure not to change the `subnet`.

This sounds complicated, so we created a little scriptlet that will do it for
you called `infra-nodes.sh`. The following scriptlet assumes you have an AWS AZ (availability zone) called
`us-east-2c` and will build and create an infra `MachineSet` for you with 3
replicas. It requires the `jq` program be installed.

View its content
[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
cat {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/infra-nodes.sh
----

You can execute that script by doing the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
bash {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/infra-nodes.sh
----

Then go ahead and run:
[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get machineset -n openshift-machine-api
----

You should see the new infra set listed:
```
...
infra-us-east-2c                       3         3                             53s
...
```

We don't yet have any ready or available machines in the set because the
instances are still coming up and bootstrapping. You can check `oc get
machine -n openshift-machine-api` to see when the instance finally starts
running. Then, you can use `oc get node` to see when the actual node is
joined and ready.

[NOTE]
====
It can take several minutes for a `Machine` to be prepared and added as a `Node`.
====

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get nodes
----

```
NAME                                         STATUS   ROLES          AGE    VERSION
ip-10-0-132-151.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    infra,worker   107s   v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-137-86.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    infra,worker   110s   v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-138-38.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    worker         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-139-204.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    infra,worker   82s    v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-139-249.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    master         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    worker         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-145-199.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    master         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-162-32.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    master         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-173-37.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    worker         16m    v1.12.4+509916ce1
```

If you're having trouble figuring out which node is the new
one, take a look at the `AGE` column. It will be the youngest! Also, in the
`ROLES` column you will notice that the new node has both a `worker` and an
`infra` role.

### Check the Labels
In our case, the youngest node was named
`ip-10-0-128-138.us-west-1.compute.internal`, so we can ask what its labels
are:

[source,bash,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
oc get node ip-10-0-128-138.us-west-1.compute.internal --show-labels
----

And, in the `LABELS` column we see:

    beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type=m4.large,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/region=us-west-1,failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/zone=us-west-1b,kubernetes.io/hostname=ip-10-0-128-138,node-role.kubernetes.io/infra=,node-role.kubernetes.io/worker=

It's hard to see, but our `node-role.kubernetes.io/infra` label is there.

### Add More Machinesets (or scale, or both)
In a realistic production deployment, you would want at least 3 `MachineSets`
to hold infrastructure components. Both the logging aggregation solution and
the service mesh will deploy ElasticSearch, and ElasticSearch really needs 3
instances spread across 3 discrete nodes. Why 3 `MachineSets`? Well, in
theory, having multiple `MachineSets` in different AZs ensures that you don't
go completely dark if AWS loses an AZ.

The `MachineSet` you created with the scriptlet already created 3 replicas
for you, so you don't have to do anything for now. Don't create any
additional ones yourself, either -- the AWS limits on the account you are
using are purposefully small.

### Extra Credit
In the `openshift-machine-api` project are several `Pods`. One of them has a
name like `clusterapi-manager-controllers-cc46df86c-2vrbp`. If you use `oc logs` on the
various containers in that `Pod`, you will see the various operator bits that
actually make the nodes come into existence.

## Quick Operator Background
Operators are just `Pods`. But they are special `Pods`. They are software
that understands how to deploy and manage applications in a Kubernetes
environment. The power of Operators relies on a recent Kubernetes feature
called `CustomResourceDefinitions` (`CRD`). A `CRD` is exactly what it sounds
like. They are a way to define a custom resource which is essentially
extending the Kubernetes API with new objects.

If you wanted to be able to create/read/update/delete `Foo` objects in
Kubernetes, you would create a `CRD` that defines what a `Foo` resource is and how it
works. You can then create `CustomResources` (`CRs`) -- instances of your `CRD`.

With Operators, the general pattern is that an Operator looks at `CRs` for its
configuration, and then it _operates_ on the Kubernetes environment to do
whatever the configuration specifies. Now you will take a look at how some of
the infrastructure operators in OpenShift do their thing.

## Moving Infrastructure Components
Now that you have some special nodes, it's time to move various
infrastructure components onto them.

### Router
The OpenShift router is managed by an `Operator` called
`openshift-ingress-operator`. Its `Pod` lives in the
`openshift-ingress-operator` project:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -n openshift-ingress-operator
----

The actual default router instance lives in the `openshift-ingress` project.  Take a look at the `Pods`.

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pods -n openshift-ingress -o wide
----

And you will see something like:

```
NAME                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP           NODE                                        NOMINATED NODE
router-default-7bc4c9c5cd-clwqt   1/1     Running   0          9h    10.128.2.7   ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal   <none>
router-default-7bc4c9c5cd-fq7m2   1/1     Running   0          9h    10.131.0.7   ip-10-0-138-38.us-east-2.compute.internal   <none>
```

Review a `Node` on which a router is running:

[source,bash,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
oc get node ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal
----

You will see that it has the role of `worker`.

```
NAME                                        STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    worker   9h    v1.12.4+509916ce1
```

The default configuration of the router operator is to
pick nodes with the role of `worker`. But, now that we have created dedicated
infrastructure nodes, we want to tell the operator to put the router
instances on nodes with the role of `infra`.

The OpenShift router operator uses a custom resource definition (`CRD`)
called `ingresses.config.openshift.io` to define the default routing
subdomain for the cluster:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get ingresses.config.openshift.io cluster -o yaml
----

The `cluster` object is observed by the router operator as well as the
master. Yours likely looks something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-08T14:37:49Z
  generation: 1
  name: cluster
  resourceVersion: "396"
  selfLink: /apis/config.openshift.io/v1/ingresses/cluster
  uid: e1ec463c-5a0b-11e9-93e8-028b0fb1636c
spec:
  domain: {{ ROUTE_SUBDOMAIN }}
status: {}
```

Individual router deployments are managed via the
`ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io` CRD. There is a default one
created in the `openshift-ingress-operator` namespace:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io default -n openshift-ingress-operator -o yaml
----

Yours looks something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-08T14:46:15Z
  finalizers:
  - ingress.openshift.io/ingress-controller
  generation: 2
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
  resourceVersion: "2056085"
  selfLink: /apis/operator.openshift.io/v1/namespaces/openshift-ingress-operator/ingresscontrollers/default
  uid: 0fac160d-5a0d-11e9-a3bb-02d64e703494
spec:
  nodePlacement:
    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
status:
  availableReplicas: 2
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: 2019-04-08T14:47:14Z
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  domain: apps.cluster-f4a3.f4a3.openshiftworkshop.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    type: LoadBalancerService
  selector: ingress.operator.openshift.io/ingress-controller-deployment=default
```

Notice that the default placement is `node-role.kubernetes.io/worker`. We
want to change that to `infra`. You can do that with the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc patch ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io default -n openshift-ingress-operator -p '{"spec":{"nodePlacement":{"nodeSelector":{"matchLabels":{"node-role.kubernetes.io/infra":""}}}}}' --type=merge
----


Run:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -n openshift-ingress -o wide
----

If you're quick enough, you might catch either `Terminating` or
`ContainerCreating` pods. The `Terminating` pod was running on one of the
worker nodes. The `Running` pods eventually are on one of our nodes with the
`infra` role.

## Registry
The registry uses a similar `CRD` mechanism to configure how the operator
deploys the actual registry pods. That CRD is
`configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io`. You will edit the `cluster` CR
object in order to add the `nodeSelector`. First, take a look at it:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/cluster -o yaml
----

You will see something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Config
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-08T14:46:13Z
  finalizers:
  - imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/finalizer
  generation: 2
  name: cluster
  resourceVersion: "1952442"
  selfLink: /apis/imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/v1/configs/cluster
  uid: 0e67a534-5a0d-11e9-a3bb-02d64e703494
spec:
  httpSecret: c8270926c490516faeea7767d760ae5d288486697ecf2836e72f45413610a7b174db7c6ca96022526311c9e2d3a488b6f7532ffea2194f0a26bf6ca557c52755
  logging: 2
  managementState: Managed
  proxy: {}
  replicas: 1
  requests:
    read:
      maxWaitInQueue: 0s
    write:
      maxWaitInQueue: 0s
  storage:
    s3:
      bucket: image-registry-us-east-2-69d6726b9f6d4d98a8f2c471e83edd82-0e71
      encrypt: true
      region: us-east-2
status:
...
```

If you run the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc patch configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/cluster -p '{"spec":{"nodeSelector":{"node-role.kubernetes.io/infra": ""}}}' --type=merge
----

It will modify the `.spec` of the registry CR in order to add the desired `nodeSelector`.

[NOTE]
====
At this time the image registry is not using a separate project for its
operator. Both the operator and the operand are housed in the
`openshift-image-registry` project.
====

After you run the patch command you should see the registry pod being moved to the
infra node. The registry is in the `openshift-image-registry` project. If you
execute the following quickly enough:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -n openshift-image-registry
----

You might see the old registry pod terminating and the new one starting.
Since the registry is being backed by an S3 bucket, it doesn't matter what
node the new registry pod instance lands on. It's talking to an object store
via an API, so any existing images stored there will remain accessible.

Also note that the default replica count is 1. In a real-world environment
you might wish to scale that up for better availability, network throughput,
or other reasons.

If you look at the node on which the registry landed (see the section on the
router), you'll note that it is now running on an infra worker.

Lastly, notice that the `CRD` for the image registry's configuration is not
namespaced -- it is cluster scoped. There is only one internal/integrated
registry per OpenShift cluster.

## Monitoring
The Cluster Monitoring operator is responsible for deploying and managing the
state of the Prometheus+Grafana+AlertManager cluster monitoring stack. It is
installed by default during the initial cluster installation. Its operator
uses a `ConfigMap` in the `openshift-monitoring` project to set various
tunables and settings for the behavior of the monitoring stack.

The following `ConfigMap` definition will configure the monitoring
solution to be redeployed onto infrastructure nodes.

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cluster-monitoring-config
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
data:
  config.yaml: |+
    alertmanagerMain:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    prometheusK8s:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    prometheusOperator:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    grafana:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    k8sPrometheusAdapter:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    kubeStateMetrics:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    telemeterClient:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
```

There is no `ConfigMap` created as part of the installation. Without one, the operator will assume
default settings. Verify the `ConfigMap` is not defined in your cluster:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get configmap cluster-monitoring-config -n openshift-monitoring
----

You should see:

```
Error from server (NotFound): configmaps "cluster-monitoring-config" not found
```

The operator will, in turn, create several `ConfigMap` objects for the
various monitoring stack components, and you can see them, too:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get configmap -n openshift-monitoring
----

You can create the new monitoring config with the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc create -f {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/cluster-monitoring-configmap.yaml
----

Watch the monitoring pods move from `worker` to `infra` `Nodes` with:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
watch 'oc get pod -n openshift-monitoring'
----

or:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -w -n openshift-monitoring
----

## Logging
OpenShift's log aggregation solution is not installed by default. There is a
dedicated lab exercise that goes through the configuration and deployment of
logging.

Commit message:

Fix login, link formatting, machine api ref, add note about disruption
Fixes openshift/openshift-cns-testdrive#441
- Uses kubeadmin with known password instead of system:admin which user don't have a certificate to.

Fix openshift/openshift-cns-testdrive#440
- fixes broken link ref
Fix openshift/openshift-cns-testdrive#439
- fixes orchestration not triggered related to rook/rook#2977
  - add restart operator pod instruction

Fix openshift/openshift-cns-testdrive#438
- simplified student operation
  - uses oc annotate instead of oc edit

Fixes openshift/openshift-cns-testdrive#437
- added a note about potential connection distruption

Fixes openshift/openshift-cns-testdrive#435
- switch to `machine-api-controllers-56bdc6874f-86jnb` replacing `clusterapi-manager-controllers-cc46df86c-2vrbp`

labguide/infra-nodes.adoc, after:

## OpenShift Infrastructure Nodes
The OpenShift subscription model allows customers to run various core
infrastructure components at no additional charge. In other words, a node
that is only running core OpenShift infrastructure components is not counted
in terms of the total number of subscriptions required to cover the
environment.

OpenShift components that fall into the infrastructure categorization
include:

* kubernetes and OpenShift control plane services ("masters")
* router
* container image registry
* cluster metrics collection ("monitoring")
* cluster aggregated logging
* service brokers

Any node running a container/pod/component not described above is considered
a worker and must be covered by a subscription.

### More MachineSet Details
In the `MachineSets` exercises you explored using `MachineSets` and scaling
the cluster by changing their replica count. In the case of an infrastructure
node, we want to create additional `Machines` that have specific Kubernetes
labels. Then, we can configure the various infrastructure components to run
specifically on nodes with those labels.

[NOTE]
====
Currently the operators that are used to control infrastructure components do
not all support the use of taints and tolerations. This means that
infrastructure workload will go onto the infrastructure nodes, but other
workload is not specifically prevented from running on the infrastructure
nodes. In other words, user workload may commingle with infrastructure
workload until full taint/toleration support is implemented in all operators.

The use of taints/tolerations is not covered in any of these exercises.
====

To accomplish this, you will create additional `MachineSets`.

In order to understand how `MachineSets` work, run the following.

This will allow you to follow along with some of the following discussion.

[source,bash,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
oc get machineset -n openshift-machine-api -o yaml cluster-5fa6-hx2ml-worker-us-east-2c
----

#### Metadata
The `metadata` on the `MachineSet` itself includes information like the name
of the `MachineSet` and various labels. 

```YAML
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-01-25T16:00:34Z
  generation: 1
  labels:
    sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: 190125-3
    sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-role: worker
    sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-type: worker
  name: 190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
  namespace: openshift-machine-api
  resourceVersion: "9027"
  selfLink: /apis/cluster.k8s.io/v1alpha1/namespaces/openshift-machine-api/machinesets/190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
  uid: 591b4d06-20ba-11e9-a880-068acb199400
```

[NOTE]
====
You might see some `annotations` on your `MachineSet` if you dumped
one that had a `MachineAutoScaler` defined.
====

#### Selector
The `MachineSet` defines how to create `Machines`, and the `Selector` tells
the operator which machines are associated with the set:

```YAML
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: 190125-3
      sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machineset: 190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
```

In this case, the cluster name is `190125-3` and there is an additional
label for the whole set.

### Template Metadata
The `template` is the part of the `MachineSet` that templates out the
`Machine`. The `template` itself can have metadata associated, and we need to
make sure that things match here when we make changes:

```YAML
  template:
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: null
      labels:
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: 190125-3
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-role: worker
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machine-type: worker
        sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machineset: 190125-3-worker-us-west-1b
```

#### Template Spec
The `template` needs to specify how the `Machine`/`Node` should be created.
You will notice that the `spec` and, more specifically, the `providerSpec`
contains all of the important AWS data to help get the `Machine` created
correctly and bootstrapped.

In our case, we want to ensure that the resulting node inherits one or more
specific labels. As you've seen in the examples above, labels go in
`metadata` sections:

```YAML
  spec:
      metadata:
        creationTimestamp: null
      providerSpec:
        value:
          ami:
            id: ami-08871aee06d13e584
...
```

By default the `MachineSets` that the installer creates do not apply any
additional labels to the node.

### Defining a Custom MachineSet
Now that you've analyzed an existing `MachineSet` it's time to go over the
rules for creating one, at least for a simple change like we're making:

1. Don't change anything in the `providerSpec`
2. Don't change any instances of `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-cluster: <clusterid>`
3. Give your `MachineSet` a unique `name`
4. Make sure any instances of `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api-machineset` match the `name`
5. Add labels you want on the nodes to `.spec.template.spec.metadata.labels`
6. Even though you're changing `MachineSet` `name` references, be sure not to change the `subnet`.

This sounds complicated, so we created a little scriptlet that will do it for
you called `infra-nodes.sh`. The following scriptlet assumes you have an AWS AZ (availability zone) called
`us-east-2c` and will build and create an infra `MachineSet` for you with 3
replicas. It requires the `jq` program be installed.

View its content
[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
cat {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/infra-nodes.sh
----

You can execute that script by doing the following:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
bash {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/infra-nodes.sh
----

Then go ahead and run:
[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get machineset -n openshift-machine-api
----

You should see the new infra set listed:
```
...
infra-us-east-2c                       3         3                             53s
...
```

We don't yet have any ready or available machines in the set because the
instances are still coming up and bootstrapping. You can check `oc get
machine -n openshift-machine-api` to see when the instance finally starts
running. Then, you can use `oc get node` to see when the actual node is
joined and ready.

[NOTE]
====
It can take several minutes for a `Machine` to be prepared and added as a `Node`.
====

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get nodes
----

```
NAME                                         STATUS   ROLES          AGE    VERSION
ip-10-0-132-151.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    infra,worker   107s   v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-137-86.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    infra,worker   110s   v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-138-38.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    worker         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-139-204.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    infra,worker   82s    v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-139-249.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    master         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    worker         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-145-199.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    master         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-162-32.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    master         9h     v1.12.4+509916ce1
ip-10-0-173-37.us-east-2.compute.internal    Ready    worker         16m    v1.12.4+509916ce1
```

If you're having trouble figuring out which node is the new
one, take a look at the `AGE` column. It will be the youngest! Also, in the
`ROLES` column you will notice that the new node has both a `worker` and an
`infra` role.

### Check the Labels
In our case, the youngest node was named
`ip-10-0-128-138.us-west-1.compute.internal`, so we can ask what its labels
are:

[source,bash,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
oc get node ip-10-0-128-138.us-west-1.compute.internal --show-labels
----

And, in the `LABELS` column we see:

    beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type=m4.large,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/region=us-west-1,failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/zone=us-west-1b,kubernetes.io/hostname=ip-10-0-128-138,node-role.kubernetes.io/infra=,node-role.kubernetes.io/worker=

It's hard to see, but our `node-role.kubernetes.io/infra` label is there.

### Add More Machinesets (or scale, or both)
In a realistic production deployment, you would want at least 3 `MachineSets`
to hold infrastructure components. Both the logging aggregation solution and
the service mesh will deploy ElasticSearch, and ElasticSearch really needs 3
instances spread across 3 discrete nodes. Why 3 `MachineSets`? Well, in
theory, having multiple `MachineSets` in different AZs ensures that you don't
go completely dark if AWS loses an AZ.

The `MachineSet` you created with the scriptlet already created 3 replicas
for you, so you don't have to do anything for now. Don't create any
additional ones yourself, either -- the AWS limits on the account you are
using are purposefully small.

### Extra Credit
In the `openshift-machine-api` project are several `Pods`. One of them has a
name like `machine-api-controllers-56bdc6874f-86jnb`. If you use `oc logs` on the
various containers in that `Pod`, you will see the various operator bits that
actually make the nodes come into existence.

## Quick Operator Background
Operators are just `Pods`. But they are special `Pods`. They are software
that understands how to deploy and manage applications in a Kubernetes
environment. The power of Operators relies on a recent Kubernetes feature
called `CustomResourceDefinitions` (`CRD`). A `CRD` is exactly what it sounds
like. They are a way to define a custom resource which is essentially
extending the Kubernetes API with new objects.

If you wanted to be able to create/read/update/delete `Foo` objects in
Kubernetes, you would create a `CRD` that defines what a `Foo` resource is and how it
works. You can then create `CustomResources` (`CRs`) -- instances of your `CRD`.

With Operators, the general pattern is that an Operator looks at `CRs` for its
configuration, and then it _operates_ on the Kubernetes environment to do
whatever the configuration specifies. Now you will take a look at how some of
the infrastructure operators in OpenShift do their thing.

## Moving Infrastructure Components
Now that you have some special nodes, it's time to move various
infrastructure components onto them.

### Router
The OpenShift router is managed by an `Operator` called
`openshift-ingress-operator`. Its `Pod` lives in the
`openshift-ingress-operator` project:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -n openshift-ingress-operator
----

The actual default router instance lives in the `openshift-ingress` project.  Take a look at the `Pods`.

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pods -n openshift-ingress -o wide
----

And you will see something like:

```
NAME                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP           NODE                                        NOMINATED NODE
router-default-7bc4c9c5cd-clwqt   1/1     Running   0          9h    10.128.2.7   ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal   <none>
router-default-7bc4c9c5cd-fq7m2   1/1     Running   0          9h    10.131.0.7   ip-10-0-138-38.us-east-2.compute.internal   <none>
```

Review a `Node` on which a router is running:

[source,bash,role="copypaste copypaste-warning"]
----
oc get node ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal
----

You will see that it has the role of `worker`.

```
NAME                                        STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
ip-10-0-144-70.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready    worker   9h    v1.12.4+509916ce1
```

The default configuration of the router operator is to
pick nodes with the role of `worker`. But, now that we have created dedicated
infrastructure nodes, we want to tell the operator to put the router
instances on nodes with the role of `infra`.

The OpenShift router operator uses a custom resource definition (`CRD`)
called `ingresses.config.openshift.io` to define the default routing
subdomain for the cluster:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get ingresses.config.openshift.io cluster -o yaml
----

The `cluster` object is observed by the router operator as well as the
master. Yours likely looks something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-08T14:37:49Z
  generation: 1
  name: cluster
  resourceVersion: "396"
  selfLink: /apis/config.openshift.io/v1/ingresses/cluster
  uid: e1ec463c-5a0b-11e9-93e8-028b0fb1636c
spec:
  domain: {{ ROUTE_SUBDOMAIN }}
status: {}
```

Individual router deployments are managed via the
`ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io` CRD. There is a default one
created in the `openshift-ingress-operator` namespace:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io default -n openshift-ingress-operator -o yaml
----

Yours looks something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-08T14:46:15Z
  finalizers:
  - ingress.openshift.io/ingress-controller
  generation: 2
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
  resourceVersion: "2056085"
  selfLink: /apis/operator.openshift.io/v1/namespaces/openshift-ingress-operator/ingresscontrollers/default
  uid: 0fac160d-5a0d-11e9-a3bb-02d64e703494
spec:
  nodePlacement:
    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
status:
  availableReplicas: 2
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: 2019-04-08T14:47:14Z
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  domain: apps.cluster-f4a3.f4a3.openshiftworkshop.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    type: LoadBalancerService
  selector: ingress.operator.openshift.io/ingress-controller-deployment=default
```

Notice that the default placement is `node-role.kubernetes.io/worker`. We
want to change that to `infra`. You can do that with the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc patch ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io default -n openshift-ingress-operator -p '{"spec":{"nodePlacement":{"nodeSelector":{"matchLabels":{"node-role.kubernetes.io/infra":""}}}}}' --type=merge
----


Run:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -n openshift-ingress -o wide
----

[NOTE]
====
Your session may timeout during the router move. Please refresh the page to get your session back. You will not lose your terminal session but may have to navigate back to this page manually.
====

If you're quick enough, you might catch either `Terminating` or
`ContainerCreating` pods. The `Terminating` pod was running on one of the
worker nodes. The `Running` pods eventually are on one of our nodes with the
`infra` role.

## Registry
The registry uses a similar `CRD` mechanism to configure how the operator
deploys the actual registry pods. That CRD is
`configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io`. You will edit the `cluster` CR
object in order to add the `nodeSelector`. First, take a look at it:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/cluster -o yaml
----

You will see something like:

```YAML
apiVersion: imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Config
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: 2019-04-08T14:46:13Z
  finalizers:
  - imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/finalizer
  generation: 2
  name: cluster
  resourceVersion: "1952442"
  selfLink: /apis/imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/v1/configs/cluster
  uid: 0e67a534-5a0d-11e9-a3bb-02d64e703494
spec:
  httpSecret: c8270926c490516faeea7767d760ae5d288486697ecf2836e72f45413610a7b174db7c6ca96022526311c9e2d3a488b6f7532ffea2194f0a26bf6ca557c52755
  logging: 2
  managementState: Managed
  proxy: {}
  replicas: 1
  requests:
    read:
      maxWaitInQueue: 0s
    write:
      maxWaitInQueue: 0s
  storage:
    s3:
      bucket: image-registry-us-east-2-69d6726b9f6d4d98a8f2c471e83edd82-0e71
      encrypt: true
      region: us-east-2
status:
...
```

If you run the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc patch configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/cluster -p '{"spec":{"nodeSelector":{"node-role.kubernetes.io/infra": ""}}}' --type=merge
----

It will modify the `.spec` of the registry CR in order to add the desired `nodeSelector`.

[NOTE]
====
At this time the image registry is not using a separate project for its
operator. Both the operator and the operand are housed in the
`openshift-image-registry` project.
====

After you run the patch command you should see the registry pod being moved to the
infra node. The registry is in the `openshift-image-registry` project. If you
execute the following quickly enough:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -n openshift-image-registry
----

You might see the old registry pod terminating and the new one starting.
Since the registry is being backed by an S3 bucket, it doesn't matter what
node the new registry pod instance lands on. It's talking to an object store
via an API, so any existing images stored there will remain accessible.

Also note that the default replica count is 1. In a real-world environment
you might wish to scale that up for better availability, network throughput,
or other reasons.

If you look at the node on which the registry landed (see the section on the
router), you'll note that it is now running on an infra worker.

Lastly, notice that the `CRD` for the image registry's configuration is not
namespaced -- it is cluster scoped. There is only one internal/integrated
registry per OpenShift cluster.

## Monitoring
The Cluster Monitoring operator is responsible for deploying and managing the
state of the Prometheus+Grafana+AlertManager cluster monitoring stack. It is
installed by default during the initial cluster installation. Its operator
uses a `ConfigMap` in the `openshift-monitoring` project to set various
tunables and settings for the behavior of the monitoring stack.

The following `ConfigMap` definition will configure the monitoring
solution to be redeployed onto infrastructure nodes.

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cluster-monitoring-config
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
data:
  config.yaml: |+
    alertmanagerMain:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    prometheusK8s:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    prometheusOperator:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    grafana:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    k8sPrometheusAdapter:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    kubeStateMetrics:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
    telemeterClient:
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/infra: ""
```

There is no `ConfigMap` created as part of the installation. Without one, the operator will assume
default settings. Verify the `ConfigMap` is not defined in your cluster:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get configmap cluster-monitoring-config -n openshift-monitoring
----

You should see:

```
Error from server (NotFound): configmaps "cluster-monitoring-config" not found
```

The operator will, in turn, create several `ConfigMap` objects for the
various monitoring stack components, and you can see them, too:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get configmap -n openshift-monitoring
----

You can create the new monitoring config with the following command:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc create -f {{ HOME_PATH }}/content/support/cluster-monitoring-configmap.yaml
----

Watch the monitoring pods move from `worker` to `infra` `Nodes` with:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
watch 'oc get pod -n openshift-monitoring'
----

or:

[source,bash,role="execute"]
----
oc get pod -w -n openshift-monitoring
----

## Logging
OpenShift's log aggregation solution is not installed by default. There is a
dedicated lab exercise that goes through the configuration and deployment of
logging.
