labguide/ldap-groupsync.adoc, before:

## Configuring External Authentication Providers

OpenShift supports a number of different authentication providers, and you can
find the complete list in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/configuring_authentication.html[authentication
documentation]. One of the most commonly used authentication providers is LDAP,
whether provided by Microsoft Active Directory or by other sources.

OpenShift can perform user authentication against an LDAP server, and can also
configure group membership and certain RBAC attributes based on LDAP group
membership.

### Background: LDAP Structure

In this environment we are providing LDAP with a Red Hat Identity Management
server running on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 running in a VM. IDM is configured
with the following user groups:

* `ose-user`: Users with OpenShift access
** Any users who should be able to log-in to OpenShift must be members of this
group
** All of the below mentioned users are in this group
* `ose-normal-dev`: Normal OpenShift users
** Regular users of OpenShift without special permissions
** Contains: `normaluser1`, `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`
* `ose-fancy-dev`: Fancy OpenShift users
** Users of OpenShift that are granted some special privileges
** Contains: `fancyuser1`, `fancyuser2`
* `ose-teamed-app`: Teamed app users
** A group of users that will have access to the same OpenShift *Project*
** Contains: `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`

#### Examine the master configuration
The installation of OpenShift already included setting up LDAP authentication in
the inventory file. As the `root` user on the master host, examine the master
config with `cat`, `less`, or your favorite editor:

[source]
----
cat /etc/origin/master/master-config.yaml
----

Look for one of the `oauthConfig` sections that looks like the following:

[source]
----
oauthConfig:
  assetPublicURL: https://{{ MASTER_EXTERNAL_FQDN }}/console/
  grantConfig:
    method: auto
  identityProviders:
  - challenge: true
    login: true 
    mappingMethod: claim <1>
    name: idm <2>
    provider:
      apiVersion: v1
      attributes: <3>
        email:
        - mail
        id:
        - dn
        name:
        - cn
        preferredUsername:
        - uid
      bindDN: <4> uid=admin,cn=users,cn=accounts,dc=unset,dc=ocp-admin,dc=aws,dc=openshifttestdrive,dc=com
      bindPassword: <5> ldapadmin
      ca: /etc/origin/master/ipa-ca.crt <6>
      insecure: false
      kind: LDAPPasswordIdentityProvider
      url: <7>ldap://idm.internal.aws.testdrive.openshift.com/cn=users,cn=accounts,dc=unset,dc=ocp-admin,dc=aws,dc=openshifttestdrive,dc=com?uid?sub?(memberOf=cn=ose-user,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=unset,dc=ocp-admin,dc=aws,dc=openshifttestdrive,dc=com)
  ...
----

Some notable fields under `identityProviders:`:

<1> `name`: The unique ID of the identity provider. It is possible to have
multiple authentication providers in an OpenShift environment, and OpenShift is
able to distinguish between them.

<2> `mappingMethod: claim`: This section has to do with how usernames are
assigned within an OpenShift cluster when multiple providers are configured. See
the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/configuring_authentication.html#mapping-identities-to-users[mapping
identities to users] section for more information.

<3> `attributes`: This section defines the LDAP fields to iterate over and
assign to the fields in the OpenShift user's "account". If any attributes are
not found / not populated when searching through the list, the entire
authentication fails. In this case we are creating an identity that is
assocuated with the LDAP `dn`, an email address from the LDAP `mail`, a name from
the LDAP `cn`, and a username from the LDAP `uid`.

<4> `bindDN`: When searching LDAP, bind to the server as this user.

<5> `bindPassword`: The password to use when binding for searching.

<6> `ca`: The CA certificate to use for validating the SSL certificate of the
LDAP server.

<7> `url`: Identifies the LDAP server and the search to perform.

For more information on the specific details of LDAP authentication in OpenShift
you can refer to the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/configuring_authentication.html#LDAPPasswordIdentityProvider[LDAP
provider documentation].

[NOTE]
====
You can find the installer configuration line that sets up LDAP authentication
by looking in `/etc/ansible/hosts` at the line that begins with
`openshift_master_identity_providers=`
====

#### Syncing LDAP Groups to OpenShift Groups
In OpenShift, groups can be used to manage users and control permissions for
multiple users at once. There is a section in the documentation on how to
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/syncing_groups_with_ldap.html[sync
groups with LDAP]. Syncing groups involves running a program called `groupsync`
when logged into OpenShift as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges, and using
a configuration file that tells OpenShift what to do with the users it finds in
the various groups.

We have provided a `groupsync` configuration file for you already. Using `cat`,
`less`, or your favorite editor, look at the following file:

[source]
----
cat /home/cloud-user/groupsync.yaml
----

Without going into too much detail (you can look at the documentation), the
`groupsync` config file does the following:

* searches LDAP using the specified bind user and password
* queries for any LDAP groups whose name begins with `ose-`
* creates OpenShift groups with a name from the `cn` of the LDAP group
* finds the members of the LDAP group and then puts them into the created
  OpenShift group
* uses the `dn` and `uid` as the UID and name attributes, respectively, in
  OpenShift

Now that you understand how the `groupsync` is configured, first make sure you
are logged in as the `root` user. Then, make sure you are logged in as a cluster
administrator:

[source]
----
oc login -u system:admin
----

And then execute the `groupsync`:

[source]
----
oc adm groups sync --sync-config=/home/cloud-user/groupsync.yaml --confirm
----

You will see output like the following:

[source]
----
group/ose-user
group/ose-normal-dev
group/ose-fancy-dev
group/ose-teamed-app
----

What you are seeing is the *Group* objects that have been created by the
`groupsync` command. If you are curious about the `--confirm` flag, check the
output of the help with `oc adm groups sync -h`.

If you want to see the *Groups* that were created, execute the following:

[source]
----
oc get groups
----

You will see output like the following:

[source]
----
NAME             USERS
ose-fancy-dev    fancyuser1, fancyuser2
ose-normal-dev   normaluser1, teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-teamed-app   teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-user         normaluser1, fancyuser1, fancyuser2, teamuser1, teamuser2
----

Take a look at a specific group in YAML:

[source]
----
oc get group ose-fancy-dev -o yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Group
metadata:
  annotations:
    openshift.io/ldap.sync-time: 2017-08-29T14:29:33Z
    openshift.io/ldap.uid: cn=ose-fancy-dev,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=internal,dc=aws,dc=testdrive,dc=openshift,dc=com
    openshift.io/ldap.url: idm.internal.aws.testdrive.openshift.com:389
  creationTimestamp: 2017-08-29T14:29:33Z
  labels:
    openshift.io/ldap.host: idm.internal.aws.testdrive.openshift.com
  name: ose-fancy-dev
  resourceVersion: "5242"
  selfLink: /oapi/v1/groups/ose-fancy-dev
  uid: 7a353ec7-8cc6-11e7-b355-0ee4d6c98466
users:
- fancyuser1
- fancyuser2
----

OpenShift has automatically associated some LDAP metadata with the *Group*, and
has listed the users who are in the group.

What happens if you list the *Users*?

[source]
----
oc get user

[root@master ~]# oc get user
No resources found.
----

Why are there no *Users* found? They are clearly listed in the *Group* definition.

*Users* are not actually created until the first time they try to log in. What
you are seeing in the *Group* definition is simply a placeholder telling
OpenShift that, if it encounters a *User* with that specific ID, that it should
be associated with the *Group*.

#### Change Group Policy
In your environment, there are a special group of super developers called
_fancy-dev_ who should have special `cluster-reader` privileges. This is a role
that allows a user to view administrative-level information about the cluster.
For example, they can see the list of all *Projects* in the cluster.

Change the policy for the `fancy-dev` *Group*:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-cluster-role-to-group cluster-reader ose-fancy-dev
----

[NOTE]
====
If you are interested in the different roles that come with OpenShift, you can
learn more about them in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/manage_authorization_policy.html[authorization
policies] documentation.
====

#### Examine `cluster-reader` policy
Go ahead and login as a regular user:

[source]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
----

Then, try to list *Projects*:

[source]
----
oc get projects
----

You will see:

[source]
----
No resources found.
----

Now, login as a member of `fancy-dev`:

[source]
----
oc login -u fancyuser1 -p openshift
----

And then perform the same `oc get projects` and you will now see the list of all
of the projects in the cluster:

[source]
----
NAME               DISPLAY NAME   STATUS
default                           Active
kube-system                       Active
logging                           Active
management-infra                  Active
openshift                         Active
openshift-infra                   Active
----

You should now be starting to understand how RBAC in OpenShift Container
Platform can work.

#### Create Projects for Collaboration
Make sure you login as the cluster administrator:

[source]
----
oc login -u system:admin
----

Then, create several *Projects* for people to collaborate:

[source]
----
oc adm new-project app-dev --display-name="Application Development"
oc adm new-project app-test --display-name="Application Testing"
oc adm new-project app-prod --display-name="Application Production"
----

You have now created several *Projects* that represent a typical Software
Development Lifecycle setup. Next, you will configure *Groups* to grant
collaborative access to these projects.

#### Map Groups to Projects
As you saw earlier, there are several roles within OpenShift that are
preconfigured. When it comes to *Projects*, you similarly can grant view, edit,
or administrative access. Let's give our `teamed-app` users access to edit the
development and testing projects:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-dev
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-test
----

And then give them access to view production:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group view ose-teamed-app -n app-prod
----

Now, give the `fancy-dev` group edit access to the production project:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-fancy-dev -n app-prod
----

#### Examine Group Access
Log in as `normaluser1` and see what *Projects* you can see:

[source]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

Then, try `teamuser1` from the `teamed-app` group:

[source]
----
oc login -u teamuser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

You did not grant the team users edit access to the production project. Go ahead
and try to create something in the production project as `teamuser1`:

[source]
----
oc project app-prod
oc new-app docker.io/siamaksade/mapit
----

You will see that it will not work:

[source]
----
[root@master ~]# oc new-app docker.io/siamaksade/mapit
--> Found Docker image 338a303 (3 weeks old) from docker.io for "docker.io/siamaksade/mapit"

    * An image stream will be created as "mapit:latest" that will track this image
    * This image will be deployed in deployment config "mapit"
    * Ports 8080/tcp, 8778/tcp, 9779/tcp will be load balanced by service "mapit"
      * Other containers can access this service through the hostname "mapit"

--> Creating resources ...
    error: User "teamuser1" cannot create imagestreams in project "app-prod"
    error: User "teamuser1" cannot create deploymentconfigs in project "app-prod"
    error: User "teamuser1" cannot create services in project "app-prod"
--> Failed
----

This failure is exactly what we wanted to see.

Commit message:

Adds a note about quota/limit when using oc adm new-project.

labguide/ldap-groupsync.adoc, after:

## Configuring External Authentication Providers

OpenShift supports a number of different authentication providers, and you can
find the complete list in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/configuring_authentication.html[authentication
documentation]. One of the most commonly used authentication providers is LDAP,
whether provided by Microsoft Active Directory or by other sources.

OpenShift can perform user authentication against an LDAP server, and can also
configure group membership and certain RBAC attributes based on LDAP group
membership.

### Background: LDAP Structure

In this environment we are providing LDAP with a Red Hat Identity Management
server running on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 running in a VM. IDM is configured
with the following user groups:

* `ose-user`: Users with OpenShift access
** Any users who should be able to log-in to OpenShift must be members of this
group
** All of the below mentioned users are in this group
* `ose-normal-dev`: Normal OpenShift users
** Regular users of OpenShift without special permissions
** Contains: `normaluser1`, `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`
* `ose-fancy-dev`: Fancy OpenShift users
** Users of OpenShift that are granted some special privileges
** Contains: `fancyuser1`, `fancyuser2`
* `ose-teamed-app`: Teamed app users
** A group of users that will have access to the same OpenShift *Project*
** Contains: `teamuser1`, `teamuser2`

#### Examine the master configuration
The installation of OpenShift already included setting up LDAP authentication in
the inventory file. As the `root` user on the master host, examine the master
config with `cat`, `less`, or your favorite editor:

[source]
----
cat /etc/origin/master/master-config.yaml
----

Look for one of the `oauthConfig` sections that looks like the following:

[source]
----
oauthConfig:
  assetPublicURL: https://{{ MASTER_EXTERNAL_FQDN }}/console/
  grantConfig:
    method: auto
  identityProviders:
  - challenge: true
    login: true 
    mappingMethod: claim <1>
    name: idm <2>
    provider:
      apiVersion: v1
      attributes: <3>
        email:
        - mail
        id:
        - dn
        name:
        - cn
        preferredUsername:
        - uid
      bindDN: <4> uid=admin,cn=users,cn=accounts,dc=unset,dc=ocp-admin,dc=aws,dc=openshifttestdrive,dc=com
      bindPassword: <5> ldapadmin
      ca: /etc/origin/master/ipa-ca.crt <6>
      insecure: false
      kind: LDAPPasswordIdentityProvider
      url: <7>ldap://idm.internal.aws.testdrive.openshift.com/cn=users,cn=accounts,dc=unset,dc=ocp-admin,dc=aws,dc=openshifttestdrive,dc=com?uid?sub?(memberOf=cn=ose-user,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=unset,dc=ocp-admin,dc=aws,dc=openshifttestdrive,dc=com)
  ...
----

Some notable fields under `identityProviders:`:

<1> `name`: The unique ID of the identity provider. It is possible to have
multiple authentication providers in an OpenShift environment, and OpenShift is
able to distinguish between them.

<2> `mappingMethod: claim`: This section has to do with how usernames are
assigned within an OpenShift cluster when multiple providers are configured. See
the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/configuring_authentication.html#mapping-identities-to-users[mapping
identities to users] section for more information.

<3> `attributes`: This section defines the LDAP fields to iterate over and
assign to the fields in the OpenShift user's "account". If any attributes are
not found / not populated when searching through the list, the entire
authentication fails. In this case we are creating an identity that is
assocuated with the LDAP `dn`, an email address from the LDAP `mail`, a name from
the LDAP `cn`, and a username from the LDAP `uid`.

<4> `bindDN`: When searching LDAP, bind to the server as this user.

<5> `bindPassword`: The password to use when binding for searching.

<6> `ca`: The CA certificate to use for validating the SSL certificate of the
LDAP server.

<7> `url`: Identifies the LDAP server and the search to perform.

For more information on the specific details of LDAP authentication in OpenShift
you can refer to the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/configuring_authentication.html#LDAPPasswordIdentityProvider[LDAP
provider documentation].

[NOTE]
====
You can find the installer configuration line that sets up LDAP authentication
by looking in `/etc/ansible/hosts` at the line that begins with
`openshift_master_identity_providers=`
====

#### Syncing LDAP Groups to OpenShift Groups
In OpenShift, groups can be used to manage users and control permissions for
multiple users at once. There is a section in the documentation on how to
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/install_config/syncing_groups_with_ldap.html[sync
groups with LDAP]. Syncing groups involves running a program called `groupsync`
when logged into OpenShift as a user with `cluster-admin` privileges, and using
a configuration file that tells OpenShift what to do with the users it finds in
the various groups.

We have provided a `groupsync` configuration file for you already. Using `cat`,
`less`, or your favorite editor, look at the following file:

[source]
----
cat /home/cloud-user/groupsync.yaml
----

Without going into too much detail (you can look at the documentation), the
`groupsync` config file does the following:

* searches LDAP using the specified bind user and password
* queries for any LDAP groups whose name begins with `ose-`
* creates OpenShift groups with a name from the `cn` of the LDAP group
* finds the members of the LDAP group and then puts them into the created
  OpenShift group
* uses the `dn` and `uid` as the UID and name attributes, respectively, in
  OpenShift

Now that you understand how the `groupsync` is configured, first make sure you
are logged in as the `root` user. Then, make sure you are logged in as a cluster
administrator:

[source]
----
oc login -u system:admin
----

And then execute the `groupsync`:

[source]
----
oc adm groups sync --sync-config=/home/cloud-user/groupsync.yaml --confirm
----

You will see output like the following:

[source]
----
group/ose-user
group/ose-normal-dev
group/ose-fancy-dev
group/ose-teamed-app
----

What you are seeing is the *Group* objects that have been created by the
`groupsync` command. If you are curious about the `--confirm` flag, check the
output of the help with `oc adm groups sync -h`.

If you want to see the *Groups* that were created, execute the following:

[source]
----
oc get groups
----

You will see output like the following:

[source]
----
NAME             USERS
ose-fancy-dev    fancyuser1, fancyuser2
ose-normal-dev   normaluser1, teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-teamed-app   teamuser1, teamuser2
ose-user         normaluser1, fancyuser1, fancyuser2, teamuser1, teamuser2
----

Take a look at a specific group in YAML:

[source]
----
oc get group ose-fancy-dev -o yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Group
metadata:
  annotations:
    openshift.io/ldap.sync-time: 2017-08-29T14:29:33Z
    openshift.io/ldap.uid: cn=ose-fancy-dev,cn=groups,cn=accounts,dc=auth,dc=internal,dc=aws,dc=testdrive,dc=openshift,dc=com
    openshift.io/ldap.url: idm.internal.aws.testdrive.openshift.com:389
  creationTimestamp: 2017-08-29T14:29:33Z
  labels:
    openshift.io/ldap.host: idm.internal.aws.testdrive.openshift.com
  name: ose-fancy-dev
  resourceVersion: "5242"
  selfLink: /oapi/v1/groups/ose-fancy-dev
  uid: 7a353ec7-8cc6-11e7-b355-0ee4d6c98466
users:
- fancyuser1
- fancyuser2
----

OpenShift has automatically associated some LDAP metadata with the *Group*, and
has listed the users who are in the group.

What happens if you list the *Users*?

[source]
----
oc get user

[root@master ~]# oc get user
No resources found.
----

Why are there no *Users* found? They are clearly listed in the *Group* definition.

*Users* are not actually created until the first time they try to log in. What
you are seeing in the *Group* definition is simply a placeholder telling
OpenShift that, if it encounters a *User* with that specific ID, that it should
be associated with the *Group*.

#### Change Group Policy
In your environment, there are a special group of super developers called
_fancy-dev_ who should have special `cluster-reader` privileges. This is a role
that allows a user to view administrative-level information about the cluster.
For example, they can see the list of all *Projects* in the cluster.

Change the policy for the `fancy-dev` *Group*:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-cluster-role-to-group cluster-reader ose-fancy-dev
----

[NOTE]
====
If you are interested in the different roles that come with OpenShift, you can
learn more about them in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/manage_authorization_policy.html[authorization
policies] documentation.
====

#### Examine `cluster-reader` policy
Go ahead and login as a regular user:

[source]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
----

Then, try to list *Projects*:

[source]
----
oc get projects
----

You will see:

[source]
----
No resources found.
----

Now, login as a member of `fancy-dev`:

[source]
----
oc login -u fancyuser1 -p openshift
----

And then perform the same `oc get projects` and you will now see the list of all
of the projects in the cluster:

[source]
----
NAME               DISPLAY NAME   STATUS
default                           Active
kube-system                       Active
logging                           Active
management-infra                  Active
openshift                         Active
openshift-infra                   Active
----

You should now be starting to understand how RBAC in OpenShift Container
Platform can work.

#### Create Projects for Collaboration
Make sure you login as the cluster administrator:

[source]
----
oc login -u system:admin
----

Then, create several *Projects* for people to collaborate:

[source]
----
oc adm new-project app-dev --display-name="Application Development"
oc adm new-project app-test --display-name="Application Testing"
oc adm new-project app-prod --display-name="Application Production"
----

You have now created several *Projects* that represent a typical Software
Development Lifecycle setup. Next, you will configure *Groups* to grant
collaborative access to these projects.

[NOTE]
====
Creating projects with `oc adm new-project` does *not* use the project request
process or the project request template. These projects will not have quotas or
limitranges applied by default. A cluster administrator can "impersonate" other
users, so there are several options if you wanted these projects to get
quotas/limit ranges:

. use `--as` to specify impersonating a regular user with `oc new-project`
. use `oc process` and provide values for the project request template, piping
  into create (eg: `oc process ... | oc create -f -`). This will create all of
  the objects in the project request template, which would include the quota and
  limit range.
. manually create/define the quota and limit ranges after creating the projects.

For these exercises it is not important to have quotas or limit ranges on these
projects.
====

#### Map Groups to Projects
As you saw earlier, there are several roles within OpenShift that are
preconfigured. When it comes to *Projects*, you similarly can grant view, edit,
or administrative access. Let's give our `teamed-app` users access to edit the
development and testing projects:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-dev
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-teamed-app -n app-test
----

And then give them access to view production:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group view ose-teamed-app -n app-prod
----

Now, give the `fancy-dev` group edit access to the production project:

[source]
----
oc adm policy add-role-to-group edit ose-fancy-dev -n app-prod
----

#### Examine Group Access
Log in as `normaluser1` and see what *Projects* you can see:

[source]
----
oc login -u normaluser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

Then, try `teamuser1` from the `teamed-app` group:

[source]
----
oc login -u teamuser1 -p openshift
oc get projects
----

You did not grant the team users edit access to the production project. Go ahead
and try to create something in the production project as `teamuser1`:

[source]
----
oc project app-prod
oc new-app docker.io/siamaksade/mapit
----

You will see that it will not work:

[source]
----
[root@master ~]# oc new-app docker.io/siamaksade/mapit
--> Found Docker image 338a303 (3 weeks old) from docker.io for "docker.io/siamaksade/mapit"

    * An image stream will be created as "mapit:latest" that will track this image
    * This image will be deployed in deployment config "mapit"
    * Ports 8080/tcp, 8778/tcp, 9779/tcp will be load balanced by service "mapit"
      * Other containers can access this service through the hostname "mapit"

--> Creating resources ...
    error: User "teamuser1" cannot create imagestreams in project "app-prod"
    error: User "teamuser1" cannot create deploymentconfigs in project "app-prod"
    error: User "teamuser1" cannot create services in project "app-prod"
--> Failed
----

This failure is exactly what we wanted to see.
