labguide/template-quota-limits.adoc, before:

## Project Request Template, Quotas, Limits
In the Application Management Basics lab, you dealt with the fundamental
building blocks of OpenShift, all contained within a *Project*.

Out of the box, OpenShift does not restrict the quantity of objects or amount of
resources (eg: CPU, memory) that they can consume within a *Project*. Further,
users may create an unlimited number of *Projects*. In a world with no
constraints, or in a POC-type environment, that would be fine. But reality calls
for a little restraint.

[WARNING]
====
Before continuing, make sure you are using logged with the built-in system administrator account in OpenShift.

----
oc login -u system:admin
----
====

### Background: Project Request Template
When users use the `new-project` command, what is actually happening behind the
scenes is a project request flow. Much like it sounds, there is a *Template*
that is processed during the project request.

#### View the Default Project Request Template
Execute the following command to view the built-in default *Project Request
Template*:

----
oc adm create-bootstrap-project-template
----

If you dig into the JSON output of this command, you will notice that there are
various parameters defined at the end. Take a look at the help output for the
`new-project` command:

----
oc new-project -h
----

Do you see how there is a `--display-name` directive on `new-project` and how
there is a `PROJECT_DISPLAYNAME` parameter?

The `new-app` workflow involves the user providing information to fulfill the
project request. OpenShift decides if this request should be allowed (for
example, are users allowed to create *Projects*? Does this user have too many
*Projects*?) and, if so, processes the *Template*.

If you look at the objects defined in the *Template*, you will notice that
there's no mention of quota or limits. You'll change that now.

NOTE: *Templates* are a powerful tool that enable you to easily create reusable
sets of OpenShift objects with powerful parameterization. They can be used to
quickly deploy more complicated and related components into OpenShift, and can be a
useful part of your organization's software development lifecycle (SDLC). More
information can be found in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/dev_guide/templates.html[template
documentation]. We will not go into more detail on *Templates* in these
exercises.

#### Modify the Project Request Template
You won't actually have to make template changes in this lab -- we've made them
for you already. Use `cat`, `less`, or your favorite editor to view the modified
*Project Request Template*:

----
cat /opt/lab/support/project_request_template.yaml
----

Take note that there are two new sections added: *ResourceQuota* and
*LimitRange*.

### Background: ResourceQuota
The
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/quota.html[quota
documentation] provides a great description of what *ResourceQuota* is about:

----
A resource quota, defined by a ResourceQuota object, provides constraints that
limit aggregate resource consumption per project. It can limit the quantity of
objects that can be created in a project by type, as well as the total amount of
compute resources and storage that may be consumed by resources in that
project.
----

In our case, we are setting a specific set of quota for CPU, memory, storage,
volume claims, and *Pods*. Take a look at the `ResourceQuota` section from the
`project_request_template.yaml` file:

[source,yaml]
----
- apiVersion: v1
  kind: ResourceQuota
  metadata:
    name: ${PROJECT_NAME}-quota <1>
  spec:
    hard:
      pods: 10 <2>
      requests.cpu: 4000m <3>
      requests.memory: 8Gi <4>
      resourcequotas: 1
      requests.storage: 25Gi <5>
      persistentvolumeclaims: 5 <6>
----

<1> While only one quota can be defined in a *Project*, it still needs a unique
name/id.
<2> The total number of pods in a non-terminal state that can exist in the project.
<3> CPUs are measured in "milicores", and more information on how
Kubernetes/OpenShift calculates cores can be found in the
link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-compute-resources-container/[upstream
documentation].
<4> There is a system of both `limits` and `requests` that we will discuss more
when we get to the *LimitRange* object.
<5> Across all persistent volume claims in a project, the sum of storage requested cannot exceed this value.
<6> The total number of persistent volume claims in a project.

For more details on the available quota options, refer back to the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/quota.html[quota
documentation].

### Background: LimitRange
The
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/limits.html[limit
range documentation] provides some good background:

----
A limit range, defined by a LimitRange object, enumerates compute resource
constraints in a project at the pod, container, image, image stream, and
persistent volume claim level, and specifies the amount of resources that a pod,
container, image, image stream, or persistent volume claim can consume.
----

While the quota sets an upper bound on the total resource consumption within a
project, the `LimitRange` generally applies to individual resources. For
example, setting how much CPU an individual *Pod* or container can use.

Take a look at the sample `LimitRange` definition that we have provided in the
`project_request_template.yaml` file:

[source,yaml]
----
- apiVersion: v1
  kind: LimitRange
  metadata:
    name: ${PROJECT_NAME}-limits
    creationTimestamp: null
  spec:
    limits:
      -
        type: Container
        max: <1>
          cpu: 4000m
          memory: 1024Mi
        min: <2>
          cpu: 10m
          memory: 5Mi
        default: <3>
          cpu: 4000m
          memory: 1024Mi
        defaultRequest: <4>
          cpu: 100m
          memory: 512Mi
----

The difference between requests and default limits is important, and is covered
in the link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/limits.html[limit
range documentation]. But, generally speaking:

<1> `max` is the highest value that may be specified for limits and requests
<2> `min` is the lowest value that may be specified for limits and requests
<3> `default` is the maximum amount (limit) that the container may consume, when
nothing is specified
<4> `defaultRequest` is the minimum amount that the container may consume, when
nothing is specified

In addition to these topics, there are things like *Quality of Service Tiers* as
well as a *Limit* : *Request* ratio. There is additionally more information in
the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/dev_guide/compute_resources.html[compute
resources] section of the documentation.

For the sake of brevity, suffice it to say that there is a complex and powerful
system of Quality of Service and resource management in OpenShift. Understanding
the types of workloads that will be run in your cluster will be important to
coming up with sensible values for all of these settings.

The settings we provide for you in these examples generally restrict projects to:

* A total CPU quota of 4 cores (`4000m`) where
** Individual containers
*** must use 4 cores or less
*** cannot be defined with less than 10 milicores
*** will default to a request of 100 milicores (if not specified)
*** may burst up to a limit of 4 cores (if not specified)
* A total memory usage of 8 Gibibyte (8192 Megabytes) where
** Individual containers
*** must use 1 Gi or less
*** cannot be defined with less than 5 Mi
*** will default to a request of 512 Mi
*** may burst up to a limit of 1024 Mi
* Total storage claims of 25 Gi or less
* A total number of 5 volume claims
* 10 or less *Pods*

In combination with quota, you can create very fine-grained controls, even
across projects, for how users are allowed to request and utilize OpenShift's
various resources.

NOTE: Remember that quotas and limits are applied at the *Project* level. *Users*
may have access to multiple *Projects*, but quotas and limits do not apply
directly to *Users*. If you want to apply one quota across multiple *Projects*,
then you should look at the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/multiproject_quota.html[multi-project
quota] documentation. We will not cover multi-project quota in these exercises.

### Installing the Project Request Template
OK, with this background in place, let's go ahead and actually tell OpenShift to
use this new *Project Request Template*.

#### Create the Template
As we discussed earlier, a *Template* is just another type of OpenShift object.
The `oc` command provides a `create` function that will take YAML/JSON as input
and simply instantiate the objects provided.

Go ahead and execute the following:

----
oc create -f /opt/lab/support/project_request_template.yaml -n default
----

This will create the *Template* object in the `default` *Project*. You can now
see the *Templates* in the `default` project with the following:

----
oc get template -n default
----

You will see something like the following:

----
NAME              DESCRIPTION   PARAMETERS    OBJECTS
project-request                 5 (5 blank)   7
----

#### Edit the `master-config.yaml`
For this exercise, we have not already configured things for you. Use your
favourite editor (`vim`, `vi`, `nano`, etc.) to edit the master's configuration
file using `sudo` privileges. For example:

----
sudo vim /etc/origin/master/master-config.yaml
----

WARNING: If you are unfamiliar with the `vi` editor, you should probably use the
`nano` editor. Use `^O` (Control + capital O) to save/write out the file after
editing, and then `^X` to exit.

In the master's configuration file, you will find a line that mentions
`projectRequestTemplate`. It will not have anything specified. When nothing is
specified, OpenShift uses the built-in *Template* that you exported in the first
exercise.

You will want to edit the config to look like the following (just that section):

----
...
projectConfig:
  projectRequestTemplate: "default/project-request"
  ...
----

#### Restart the Master
Since you have made a configuration change to the master, you will need to
restart its service. You can do so with the following command with `sudo` privileges:

----
sudo systemctl restart atomic-openshift-master
----

### Test the Project Request Template
At this point you have reconfigured the master to use the *Project Request
Template* (a special kind of *Template*) called `project-request` that is
located in the `default` *Project*. Now it is time to observe this change in
action.

#### Create a New Project
When creating a new project, you should see that a *Quota* and a *LimitRange*
are created with it. First, create a new project called `template-test`:

----
oc new-project template-test
----

Then, use `describe` to look at some of this *Project's* details:

----
oc describe project template-test
----

The output will look something like:

----
Name:           template-test
Namespace:      <none>
Created:        5 seconds ago
Labels:         <none>
Annotations:    openshift.io/description=
                openshift.io/display-name=
                openshift.io/requester=fancyuser1
                openshift.io/sa.scc.mcs=s0:c12,c9
                openshift.io/sa.scc.supplemental-groups=1000150000/10000
                openshift.io/sa.scc.uid-range=1000150000/10000
Display Name:   <none>
Description:    <none>
Status:         Active
Node Selector:  <none>
Quota:
        Name:                   template-test-quota
        Resource                Used    Hard
        --------                ----    ----
        persistentvolumeclaims  0       5
        pods                    0       10
        requests.cpu            0       4
        requests.memory         0       4Gi
        requests.storage        0       25Gi
        resourcequotas          1       1
Resource limits:
        Name:           template-test-limits
        Type            Resource        Min     Max     Default
        ----            --------        ---     ---     ---
        Container       cpu             10m     4       4
        Container       memory          5Mi     1Gi     1Gi
----

You can also see that the *Quota* and *LimitRange* objects were created:

----
oc get quota -n template-test
----

You will see:

----
NAME                  AGE
template-test-quota   2m
----

And:

----
oc get limitrange -n template-test
----

You will see:

----
NAME                   AGE
template-test-limits   2m
----

### Configure Using the Installer
While it is possible to configure the *ProjectRequestTemplate* using the advanced
installer, you are still responsible for installing the template into the
*Project* that you specify. For example, we could have specified the following:

[source]
----
osm_project_request_template='default/project-request'
----

But, until a *Template* was created in the `default` *Project* called
`project-request`, user *Project* creation would have failed due to a lack of
the template. So, beware.

### Clean Up
If you wish, you can deploy the application from the Application Management
Basics lab again inside this `template-test` project to observe how the *Quota*
and *LimitRange* are applied. If you do, be sure to look at the JSON/YAML output
(`oc get ... -o yaml`) for things like the *DeploymentConfig* and the *Pod*.

Before you continue, you may wish to delete the *Project* you just created:

----
oc delete project template-test
----

Commit message:

add more storage examples for quota

labguide/template-quota-limits.adoc, after:

## Project Request Template, Quotas, Limits
In the Application Management Basics lab, you dealt with the fundamental
building blocks of OpenShift, all contained within a *Project*.

Out of the box, OpenShift does not restrict the quantity of objects or amount of
resources (eg: CPU, memory) that they can consume within a *Project*. Further,
users may create an unlimited number of *Projects*. In a world with no
constraints, or in a POC-type environment, that would be fine. But reality calls
for a little restraint.

[WARNING]
====
Before continuing, make sure you are using logged with the built-in system administrator account in OpenShift.

----
oc login -u system:admin
----
====

### Background: Project Request Template
When users use the `new-project` command, what is actually happening behind the
scenes is a project request flow. Much like it sounds, there is a *Template*
that is processed during the project request.

#### View the Default Project Request Template
Execute the following command to view the built-in default *Project Request
Template*:

----
oc adm create-bootstrap-project-template
----

If you dig into the JSON output of this command, you will notice that there are
various parameters defined at the end. Take a look at the help output for the
`new-project` command:

----
oc new-project -h
----

Do you see how there is a `--display-name` directive on `new-project` and how
there is a `PROJECT_DISPLAYNAME` parameter?

The `new-app` workflow involves the user providing information to fulfill the
project request. OpenShift decides if this request should be allowed (for
example, are users allowed to create *Projects*? Does this user have too many
*Projects*?) and, if so, processes the *Template*.

If you look at the objects defined in the *Template*, you will notice that
there's no mention of quota or limits. You'll change that now.

NOTE: *Templates* are a powerful tool that enable you to easily create reusable
sets of OpenShift objects with powerful parameterization. They can be used to
quickly deploy more complicated and related components into OpenShift, and can be a
useful part of your organization's software development lifecycle (SDLC). More
information can be found in the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/dev_guide/templates.html[template
documentation]. We will not go into more detail on *Templates* in these
exercises.

#### Modify the Project Request Template
You won't actually have to make template changes in this lab -- we've made them
for you already. Use `cat`, `less`, or your favorite editor to view the modified
*Project Request Template*:

----
cat /opt/lab/support/project_request_template.yaml
----

Take note that there are two new sections added: *ResourceQuota* and
*LimitRange*.

### Background: ResourceQuota
The
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/quota.html[quota
documentation] provides a great description of what *ResourceQuota* is about:

----
A resource quota, defined by a ResourceQuota object, provides constraints that
limit aggregate resource consumption per project. It can limit the quantity of
objects that can be created in a project by type, as well as the total amount of
compute resources and storage that may be consumed by resources in that
project.
----

In our case, we are setting a specific set of quota for CPU, memory, storage,
volume claims, and *Pods*. Take a look at the `ResourceQuota` section from the
`project_request_template.yaml` file:

[source,yaml]
----
- apiVersion: v1
  kind: ResourceQuota
  metadata:
    name: ${PROJECT_NAME}-quota <1>
  spec:
    hard:
      pods: 10 <2>
      requests.cpu: 4000m <3>
      requests.memory: 8Gi <4>
      resourcequotas: 1
      requests.storage: 50Gi <5>
      persistentvolumeclaims: 5 <6>
      glusterfs-storage.storageclass.storage.k8s.io/requests.storage: 25Gi <7>
      glusterfs-storage-block.storageclass.storage.k8s.io/persistentvolumeclaims: 0 <8>
----

<1> While only one quota can be defined in a *Project*, it still needs a unique
name/id.
<2> The total number of pods in a non-terminal state that can exist in the project.
<3> CPUs are measured in "milicores", and more information on how
Kubernetes/OpenShift calculates cores can be found in the
link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-compute-resources-container/[upstream
documentation].
<4> There is a system of both `limits` and `requests` that we will discuss more
when we get to the *LimitRange* object.
<5> Across all persistent volume claims in a project, the sum of storage requested cannot exceed this value.
<6> The total number of persistent volume claims in a project.
<7> This settings limits the amount of storage that can be provisioned using the `glusterfs-storage` *StorageClass*.
<8> Setting the amount of **PersistentVolumeClaims** to `0` the use of the **StorageClass** `glusterfs-storage-block` is not allowed in this project.

For more details on the available quota options, refer back to the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/quota.html[quota
documentation].

### Background: LimitRange
The
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/limits.html[limit
range documentation] provides some good background:

----
A limit range, defined by a LimitRange object, enumerates compute resource
constraints in a project at the pod, container, image, image stream, and
persistent volume claim level, and specifies the amount of resources that a pod,
container, image, image stream, or persistent volume claim can consume.
----

While the quota sets an upper bound on the total resource consumption within a
project, the `LimitRange` generally applies to individual resources. For
example, setting how much CPU an individual *Pod* or container can use.

Take a look at the sample `LimitRange` definition that we have provided in the
`project_request_template.yaml` file:

[source,yaml]
----
- apiVersion: v1
  kind: LimitRange
  metadata:
    name: ${PROJECT_NAME}-limits
    creationTimestamp: null
  spec:
    limits:
      -
        type: Container
        max: <1>
          cpu: 4000m
          memory: 1024Mi
        min: <2>
          cpu: 10m
          memory: 5Mi
        default: <3>
          cpu: 4000m
          memory: 1024Mi
        defaultRequest: <4>
          cpu: 100m
          memory: 512Mi
----

The difference between requests and default limits is important, and is covered
in the link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/limits.html[limit
range documentation]. But, generally speaking:

<1> `max` is the highest value that may be specified for limits and requests
<2> `min` is the lowest value that may be specified for limits and requests
<3> `default` is the maximum amount (limit) that the container may consume, when
nothing is specified
<4> `defaultRequest` is the minimum amount that the container may consume, when
nothing is specified

In addition to these topics, there are things like *Quality of Service Tiers* as
well as a *Limit* : *Request* ratio. There is additionally more information in
the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/dev_guide/compute_resources.html[compute
resources] section of the documentation.

For the sake of brevity, suffice it to say that there is a complex and powerful
system of Quality of Service and resource management in OpenShift. Understanding
the types of workloads that will be run in your cluster will be important to
coming up with sensible values for all of these settings.

The settings we provide for you in these examples generally restrict projects to:

* A total CPU quota of 4 cores (`4000m`) where
** Individual containers
*** must use 4 cores or less
*** cannot be defined with less than 10 milicores
*** will default to a request of 100 milicores (if not specified)
*** may burst up to a limit of 4 cores (if not specified)
* A total memory usage of 8 Gibibyte (8192 Megabytes) where
** Individual containers
*** must use 1 Gi or less
*** cannot be defined with less than 5 Mi
*** will default to a request of 512 Mi
*** may burst up to a limit of 1024 Mi
* Total storage claims of 25 Gi or less
* A total number of 5 volume claims
* 10 or less *Pods*

In combination with quota, you can create very fine-grained controls, even
across projects, for how users are allowed to request and utilize OpenShift's
various resources.

NOTE: Remember that quotas and limits are applied at the *Project* level. *Users*
may have access to multiple *Projects*, but quotas and limits do not apply
directly to *Users*. If you want to apply one quota across multiple *Projects*,
then you should look at the
link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.5/admin_guide/multiproject_quota.html[multi-project
quota] documentation. We will not cover multi-project quota in these exercises.

### Installing the Project Request Template
OK, with this background in place, let's go ahead and actually tell OpenShift to
use this new *Project Request Template*.

#### Create the Template
As we discussed earlier, a *Template* is just another type of OpenShift object.
The `oc` command provides a `create` function that will take YAML/JSON as input
and simply instantiate the objects provided.

Go ahead and execute the following:

----
oc create -f /opt/lab/support/project_request_template.yaml -n default
----

This will create the *Template* object in the `default` *Project*. You can now
see the *Templates* in the `default` project with the following:

----
oc get template -n default
----

You will see something like the following:

----
NAME              DESCRIPTION   PARAMETERS    OBJECTS
project-request                 5 (5 blank)   7
----

#### Edit the `master-config.yaml`
For this exercise, we have not already configured things for you. Use your
favourite editor (`vim`, `vi`, `nano`, etc.) to edit the master's configuration
file using `sudo` privileges. For example:

----
sudo vim /etc/origin/master/master-config.yaml
----

WARNING: If you are unfamiliar with the `vi` editor, you should probably use the
`nano` editor. Use `^O` (Control + capital O) to save/write out the file after
editing, and then `^X` to exit.

In the master's configuration file, you will find a line that mentions
`projectRequestTemplate`. It will not have anything specified. When nothing is
specified, OpenShift uses the built-in *Template* that you exported in the first
exercise.

You will want to edit the config to look like the following (just that section):

----
...
projectConfig:
  projectRequestTemplate: "default/project-request"
  ...
----

#### Restart the Master
Since you have made a configuration change to the master, you will need to
restart its service. You can do so with the following command with `sudo` privileges:

----
sudo systemctl restart atomic-openshift-master-api
----

### Test the Project Request Template
At this point you have reconfigured the master to use the *Project Request
Template* (a special kind of *Template*) called `project-request` that is
located in the `default` *Project*. Now it is time to observe this change in
action.

#### Create a New Project
When creating a new project, you should see that a *Quota* and a *LimitRange*
are created with it. First, create a new project called `template-test`:

----
oc new-project template-test
----

Then, use `describe` to look at some of this *Project's* details:

----
oc describe project template-test
----

The output will look something like:

----
Name:           template-test
Namespace:      <none>
Created:        5 seconds ago
Labels:         <none>
Annotations:    openshift.io/description=
                openshift.io/display-name=
                openshift.io/requester=fancyuser1
                openshift.io/sa.scc.mcs=s0:c12,c9
                openshift.io/sa.scc.supplemental-groups=1000150000/10000
                openshift.io/sa.scc.uid-range=1000150000/10000
Display Name:   <none>
Description:    <none>
Status:         Active
Node Selector:  <none>
Quota:
Resource								Used	Hard
--------								----	----
glusterfs-block.storageclass.storage.k8s.io/persistentvolumeclaims	0	0
glusterfs.storageclass.storage.k8s.io/requests.storage			0	25Gi
persistentvolumeclaims							0	5
pods									0	10
requests.cpu								0	4
requests.memory								0	8Gi
requests.storage							0	50Gi
resourcequotas								1	1
Resource limits:
        Name:           template-test-limits
        Type            Resource        Min     Max     Default
        ----            --------        ---     ---     ---
        Container       cpu             10m     4       4
        Container       memory          5Mi     1Gi     1Gi
----

You can also see that the *Quota* and *LimitRange* objects were created:

----
oc get quota -n template-test
----

You will see:

----
NAME                  AGE
template-test-quota   2m
----

And:

----
oc get limitrange -n template-test
----

You will see:

----
NAME                   AGE
template-test-limits   2m
----

### Configure Using the Installer
While it is possible to configure the *ProjectRequestTemplate* using the advanced
installer, you are still responsible for installing the template into the
*Project* that you specify. For example, we could have specified the following:

[source]
----
osm_project_request_template='default/project-request'
----

But, until a *Template* was created in the `default` *Project* called
`project-request`, user *Project* creation would have failed due to a lack of
the template. So, beware.

### Clean Up
If you wish, you can deploy the application from the Application Management
Basics lab again inside this `template-test` project to observe how the *Quota*
and *LimitRange* are applied. If you do, be sure to look at the JSON/YAML output
(`oc get ... -o yaml`) for things like the *DeploymentConfig* and the *Pod*.

Before you continue, you may wish to delete the *Project* you just created:

----
oc delete project template-test
----
