labguide/qwiklab-index/docs/index.md, before:

# Welcome to the OpenShift Test Drive for Administrators

Please follow below instructions to get started.


## 1. Pre-requisites

For this lab you need to fulfill the following pre-requisites:

- Workstation with Internet access

- SSH client supporting authentication with a private key



## 2. How to start your Test Drive

To start the Test Drive press <b><span style="background-color:#909e33; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Start Lab&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></b> button in the top bar.



## 3. How to access your lab guide

When you started your Test Drive the lab environment will provision in roughly 5 minutes. During this time you'll see a progress bar above this page.

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-progress-bar.png)

When your lab infrastructure is ready this progress bar disappear and you will
see a button to end your lab session and countdown until automatic shutdown
instead:

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-end-button.png)

Click the <span style="background-color:#0087cf; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Addl. Info&nbsp;&nbsp;</span> button to retrieve the URL to your lab guide:

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-labguide-url.png)

Open this URL in a new tab to view your personalized lab guide!



## 4. How to access the lab environment

When your lab infrastructure is ready click the <span style="background-color:#0087cf; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Connect&nbsp;&nbsp;</span> button and download the SSH private key to your computer:

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-pem-key.png)

&#8680; To login via SSH download the PEM file to your machine and change the permissions:

    chmod 0400 ~/Downloads/<pem-file-name>

Click the <span style="background-color:#0087cf; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Addl. Info&nbsp;&nbsp;</span> button again to retrieve IP address of your environment:

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-master-ip.png)

&#8680; Then login with the ssh client like this:

    ssh -i ~/Downloads/<pem-file-name> -l cloud-user <MasterIPAddress>

Follow the lab guide to navigate the environment and conduct the prepared exercises.

Have fun!

Commit message:

rework landing page, move connection instructions to lab guide, smaller formatting changes

labguide/qwiklab-index/docs/index.md, after:

# Welcome to the OpenShift Test Drive for Administrators

Please follow below instructions to get started.


## 1. Pre-requisites

For this lab you need to fulfill the following pre-requisites:

- Workstation with Internet access

- SSH client supporting authentication with a private key



## 2. How to start your Test Drive

To start the Test Drive press <b><span style="background-color:#909e33; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Start Lab&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></b> button in the top bar.


## 3. Download Access Key

Immediately after pressing the start button pane labeled <b><span style="background-color:#777777; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Connect&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></b> will rollover presenting your custom SSH access key to download.

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-pem-key.png)

Download the *PEM* key to your computer if you are using regular OpenSSH on the command line Linux or macOS. Choose *PPK* if you are using PuTTY on Windows.

Click "Connect" button again to hide the pane.

## 4. Wait for lab provisioning to complete.

When you started your Test Drive the lab environment provision process initiated in the background. During provisioning you can monitor progress in the top navigation bar

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-progress-bar.png)

In total provisioning usually takes about 5 minutes and should not exceed 10 minutes.
When your lab infrastructure is ready this progress bar disappears and you will
see a button to end your lab session and countdown until automatic shutdown
instead:

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-end-button.png)

## 5. How to access your personalized lab guide

This lab features a personalized lab guide which is ready as soon as the environment is provisioned. The button will appear on the right side of your screen as soon as that is the case.

To access it, click the <span style="background-color:#0087cf; color:white; font-size: 120%">&nbsp;&nbsp;Addl. Info&nbsp;&nbsp;</span> button on the right.

If it is not visible wait for your lab environment to complete provisioning!
An additional roll-over menu appears similar to the screen shot below.

![CNS Lab Infrastructure](img/qwiklab-labguide-url.png)

Open the URL in a new tab to view your personalized lab guide!
It will walk you through the rest of the lab show you how to access your environment.

Have fun!
